
# Characteristics of the Soul

318. A wise man should not judge by appearances when a sniveller[^mean-snivel]
cries for mercy, pretends that he is oppressed, complains, twists and turns,
and laments. With a man who behaves like this I have become certain that he
was the oppressor who went over the limit and committed excessive abuses. And
likewise I have seen a man bearing an injustice speak calmly without
complaining and only displaying a little anxiety. At first glance, without
further examination, you would have taken him for the oppressor. In cases such
as this it is important to establish the facts, fight resolutely against our
inclination to take sides, not incline towards or against such attitudes as we
have described, and seek to be impartial to all, as we are obliged to by
justice.

<!-- TODO Double check first sentence -->

319. A curious thing about human nature is that carelessness is bad when it is
good to know how to make use of it sometimes. This can only be explained by
the fact that a man who is naturally inclined to carelessness, makes use of it
when he should be vigilant. It is absentmindedness with no sense of reality.
His carelessness belongs under the heading of ignorance and that is why it is
bad. On the other hand, a spirit which is vigilant by nature only makes use of
carelessness for a good purpose when he should not study or research deeply
into the subject. To pretend to ignore something in this case means to
understand reality, to refuse to act precipitously,[mean-precipitious] to use
moderation, and to prevent the worst happening. Thus it is praiseworthy to
know how to pretend not to be listening and bad to be naturally inattentive.

320. The same could be said about admitting one is afraid or concealing fact.
To make it obvious that one is troubled as soon as one begins to have
difficulties is bad, because it means that you cannot control yourself and
your display of emotion serves no useful purpose. Indeed, divine law counsels
against it; it stops you doing what has to be done and to make the necessary
arrangements in view of the events which one foresees and which may be more
terrible than the present situation which has given rise to this fear.

321. Now, given that it is wrong to let your fear be seen, the opposite is
good, that is, to display patience, because that means you are in control of
yourself, you have turned away from useless actions and towards actions which
are profitable and useful both immediately and in the future.

322. As for hiding your patience, that is wrong too, since it would look as if
you were unfeeling, hardhearted and lacking in mercy. These faults are found
only among wicked people, vicious natures, and cruel and vile souls.

323. All this being very ugly, the opposite, which consists of concealing the
fact that you are troubled, is praiseworthy because it is a mark of piety,
gentleness, charity, and compassion.

324. Thus one can say that the happy medium, for a man, is to have a sensitive
soul but an impassive[^mean-impassive] body, that is to say that neither on his face or in his
comportment[^mean-comportment] should there be any sign that he is troubled.

    If a man whose own judgement is poor only knew what harm his false
    calculations had brought upon him so far, he would find success in the
    future if he stopped relying on his own judgement, AllƒÅh guide us.

[^mean-comportment]: _comportment_: Personal bearing, carriage, demeanour, deportment; behaviour, outward conduct, course of action.