# The Mind and Repose

Do not listen to what other people say. Listen only to the Words of the
Creator. That is the way to a completely sound mind and to perfect
repose.[^mean-repose]

13. Anyone who believes himself safe from all criticism and reproach is out of
his mind.

14. Anyone who studies deeply and disciplines his soul not to rest until it
has found the truth, even if it is painful at first, will take more pleasure
in criticism than in praise. Indeed, if he hears people praise him, even if it
is well-deserved, he will become proud, and his virtue will be corrupted.

    If he hears people praise him and the praise is undeserved, he will be
    pleased, but wrongly so, and this is a serious fault. On the other hand,
    if he hears people criticise him and it is deserved, he might be led to
    correct the behaviour that led to it. This criticism would be a piece of
    considerable good luck that only a fool would ignore. If someone is
    criticized unjustly and he controls himself, he will gain merit by his
    meekness[^mean-meekness] and patience. Furthermore, all the good works
    ever done by his critic will be credited to him, and he will gain the
    benefit of them on Judgment Day when they will stand him in very good
    stead[^mean-good-stead] when he needs them, although they were not a
    result of his own efforts. And this is a supreme piece of good luck which
    would be mad to disdain. If he does not hear people's praise, what they
    say or do not say makes no difference to him. But it is a different matter
    with their criticism, he wins either way, whether he hears their criticism
    or not.

<!-- TODO Check if you can get the ḥadīth reference. -->

15. If it were not for the words of the Prophet !pbuh about “good praise”
which “brings to the believers the express good news of the happiness which
has been promised,” it might have been a sign of wisdom to prefer being
criticized---even unjustly---to being praised with good reason. But these
words were spoken. The promised happiness “will always arise from merit, not
from absence of merit; it will reward only the object of praise, not merely
the fact that praises were uttered.”

16. There is no difference between virtues and vices, between acts
of devotion and acts of rebellion, except in as far as the soul feels
attracted or repelled. Happy the man whose soul finds pleasure in virtue and
good deeds, fleeing vice and rebellion. And unhappy the man whose soul finds
pleasure in vice and rebellion, fleeing virtue and good deeds. This is nothing
less than the sacred order of things ordained by the providence of the
Almighty, Allāh.

17. Anyone who strives after eternity is on the side of the Angels. Anyone who
strives after evil is on the side of the demons. Anyone who seeks fame and
victory is on the side of the tigers. Anyone who seeks sensual pleasures is on
the side of the [dumb] beasts. Anyone who seeks money for its own sake, not
for spending on pious obligations and praiseworthy acts of charity, is too
base, too vile to be compared with a beast. He resembles rather the waters
which gather in caves in inaccessible places: no animal profits at all from
them, [except now and then a bird; then the wind and the sun dry up what is
left. And the same thing happens to possessions which are not consecrated to
pious works].

<!-- TODO Check if Angels should be capitalized -->

18. A wise man has no satisfaction in a quality which sets him below tigers,
dumb beasts, and inanimate objects. He rejoices only in his progress in that
virtue by which Allāh distinguishes him from these same tigers, dumb beasts,
and inanimate objects: this is the virtue of intelligence which he shares with
the Angels.

19. Anyone who feels proud of courage which is not applied in its normal
directions, i.e. the service of Almighty Allāh, let him understand that the
tiger is braver than him, that the lion, the wolf, and the elephant are braver
than him.

20. Anyone who glories in his own physical strength, let it be known to him
that the mule, the ox, and the elephant are physically stronger than him.

21. Anyone who glories is his ability to carry heavy weights, let it be known
to him that the donkey can carry greater weights.

<!-- TODO "than he" or "than him"? -->

22. Anyone who glories in his ability to run, let it be known to him that the
dog and the hare are faster runners than he.

<!-- TODO "than he" or "than him"? -->

23. Anyone who glories in the sound of his voice, let it be known to him that
many of the birds have sweeter voices than he, and the sound of the flutes is
more exquisite and charming than the sound of his voice. How can anyone take
pride or satisfaction in qualities in which these animals are superior?

24. But a man whose intellect is strong, whose knowledge is extensive, and
whose deeds are good, should rejoice because only the Angels and the best
of men are superior to him in these matters.

25. Allāh says «Anyone who fears the majesty of Allāh, and controls himself
against passion, he shall have Paradise for his refuge.» (Quran 79:40--41)
These words encapsulate all virtue: _to control oneself against passion_ means
in fact to turn away from one's natural tendency towards anger and lust,
things which are both under the dictates of passion. Then all that is left for
the soul to use is the intellect which Allāh has given it, the good sense
which distinguishes it from the beasts, from insects or vermin, and from
tigers.

26. “Never lose your temper,” as Allāh's Prophet !pbuh said to a man asking
advice, and, as he also said commanding him, “Do as you would be done by,”
together encapsulate the whole of virtue. Indeed, the fact that the Prophet
forbade all anger implies that although the soul has been given the ability to
be angry, it should refrain from this passion, and the [Prophet's] commandment
_to do as you would be done by_ implies that the souls should turn away from
the strong force of greed and lust and uphold the authority or the means of
justice which springs from rationality which is part of a reasonable soul.

27. I have seen the majority of people---except those who Allāh Almighty has
protected, and they are few---throw themselves into the miseries, the worries,
and fatigues of this world, and pile up a mountain of sin which will mean that
they enter hellfire in the Hereafter and will have no advantage from the
perfidious[^mean-perfidious] intentions which they nurse so carefully, such as wishing for an
inflation of prices which would bring disaster upon the children, the
innocent, or wishing the worst trials upon those they hate. They know very
well that these bad intentions will not necessarily bring about what they
desire or guarantee its advent, and if they clarified and improved their
intentions they would hasten the repose of their spirits. They would then have
the time to devote themselves to their own business and would thus profit a
great deal in addition to the return of their souls to Allāh, and all this
without having at all hastened or delayed the realization of their desires. Is
there any worse deception than the attitude which we warn against here, and is
there any greater happiness than the one which we are promoting?

28. When we contemplate the duration of this Universe, we see it limited to
the present moment, which is nothing but the point which separates two
infinities of time. The past and the future are as meaningless as if they did
not exist. Is anyone more misguided than the man who barters an eternal future
for a moment which passes quicker than the blink of an eye?

29. When a man is asleep, he leaves the world and forgets all joy and all
sorrow. If he kept his spirit in the same state on waking, he would know
perfect happiness.

30. A man who harms his family and his neighbors is viler than them. Anyone
who returns evil for evil is as bad as them. Anyone who refrains from
returning evil is their master, their superior, and the most virtuous among
them.

