# Knowledge

31. If knowledge had no other merit than to make the ignorant fear and respect
you, and the scholars love and honour you, this would be good enough reason to
seek after it. Let alone all its other merits in this world and the next!

32. If ignorance had no other fault than to make the ignorant man jealous of
knowledgeable men and jubilant at seeing more people like himself, this by
itself would be a reason enough to oblige us to flee it. Let alone the other
bad results of this evil in this world and the next!

33. If knowledge and the action of devoting oneself to it had no purpose
except to free the man who seeks it from the exhausting anxieties and many
worries which afflict the mind, that alone would certainly be enough to drive
us to seek knowledge. But what should we say of the other benefits too
numerous to list, the least of which are the above-mentioned, and all of which
accrue to the knowledgeable man. In search of benefits as small as these, the
petty kings have worn themselves out in seeking distraction from their
anxieties in games of chess, dicing, wine, song, hunting expeditions, and other
pastimes which bring nothing but harm in this world and the next and
absolutely no benefit.

34. If the scholar who has spent long peaceful hours [at his studies] stopped
to think how his knowledge has protected him against humiliation at the hands
of the ignorant, and against anxiety about unknown truths, and what joy it has
brought him by enabling him to solve problems which others find insoluble, he
would certainly increase his expressions of gratitude to Allāh and rejoice
more in the knowledge that he has and desire even more to add to it.

35. Anyone who spends his time studying something inferior, abandoning higher
studies of which he is capable, is like someone who sows corn in a field
capable of growing wheat, or who plants bushes in soil which could support
palm trees and olives.

36. To spread knowledge among those incapable of understanding it would be as
harmful as giving honey and sugary confections to someone with a fever, or
giving musk and amber to someone with a migraine caused by an excess of bile.

37. A man who is a miser with his knowledge is worse than a man who is a miser
with his money, for the latter is afraid of using up what he possesses but the
former is being mean with something which does not get used up and is not lost
when it is given away.

38. Anyone who has a natural inclination towards a branch of knowledge, even
if it is inferior to other branches, should not abandon it, or he would be
like someone who plants coconuts in al-Andalus or olive trees in India where
neither would produce fruit.

39. The most noble branches of knowledge are those which bring you close to
the Creator and help you to be pleasing to Him.

40. When you compare yourself with others in matters of wealth, position, and
health, you should look at people less favored than yourself. When you
compare yourself with others in matters of religion, knowledge, and virtue,
look at people who are better than yourself.

41. The mysterious branches of knowledge are like a strong drug which benefits
a strong body but damages a weak one. In the same way, the esoteric[^mean-esoteric] branches
of knowledge enrich a strong mind, and refine it, purifying it of its flaws,
but destroy a weak mind.

42. If a madman threw himself as deeply into good sense as he throws himself
as deeply into madness, he would surely be wiser than al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī,[^basri]
Plato of Athens,[^plato] and Vuzurgmihr the Persian.[^vuzurgmihr]

43. Intelligence has its limits; it is useless unless it is based upon the
guidance of religion or on good fortune in this world.

44. Do not harm your soul by experimenting with corrupt views in order to
demonstrate their corruption to someone who has consulted you, otherwise you
will lose your soul. If you shield yourself from acting in a detestable way,
any criticism that can be thrown at you by a man of corrupt beliefs because
you disagree with him is better than his respect and better than the bad
effect on both of you if you committed these detestable acts.

45. Guard against taking pleasure in any way that will harm your soul and is
not required of you by the religious law nor by virtue.

46. Knowledge no longer exists if one has ignored the attributes of the
Almighty Great Creator.

47. There is no worse calamity for knowledge and for scholars than when
outsiders intrude. They are ignorant and think they are knowledgeable; they
ruin everything and believe that they are helping.

48. Anyone who is seeking happiness in the Hereafter, wisdom in this world,
the best way to behave, the sum of all moral qualities, and the practice of
all virtues, should take as his model Muḥammad, the Prophet of Allāh !pbuh
and emulate as far as possible the Prophet's morals and behaviour. May Allāh
help us to take him as an example, by His grace, amīn [amīn]!

49. The ignorant have annoyed me on two occasions in my lifetime. First, when
they spoke of things they did not know, at a time when I was equally ignorant;
the second time when they kept silent in my presence [in the days when I had
learnt something]. In the same way they were always silent about matters which
would have benefited them to speak about, and spoke about matters which
brought them no benefit.

50. Scholars have brought me pleasure on two occasions in my lifetime: first,
they taught me when I was ignorant; the second time was when they conversed
with me after I had been taught.

51. One of the merits of religious knowledge and asceticism in this world is
that Almighty Allāh does not put it within the reach of anyone except those
who are worthy of it and deserve it. One of the disadvantages of the great
things of this world, wealth and fame, is that they are mostly given to people
who are unworthy of them and do not deserve them.

52. Anyone who is seeking after virtue should keep company with the virtuous
and should take no companion with him on his way except the noblest friend,
one of those people who is sympathetic, charitable, truthful, sociable,
patient, trustworthy, loyal, magnanimous, pure in conscience, and a true
friend.

53. Anyone who is seeking fame, fortune, and pleasure will keep company only
with those people who resemble mad dogs and sly foxes: they will take for
their travelling companions only people [inimical[^mean-inimical] to his
belief] who are cunning and depraved in nature.

54. The usefulness of the knowledge [of good] in the practice of virtue is
considerable: anyone who knows the beauty of virtue will practise it, though
it may be rarely. Knowing the ugliness of vice, he will avoid it, though it
may be rarely. The man with knowledge of good will listen to soundly-based
praise and desire it for himself. He will listen to talk of evil and desire to
avoid it. From this premise it necessarily follows that knowledge has a part
in every virtue, and ignorance has a part in every vice. A man who has had no
instruction in the knowledge [of good] will not practise virtue unless he has
an extremely pure nature, a virtuous constitution. It is the particular state
of the Prophets !s[them] for Allāh has taught them virtue in its entirety,
without them having learnt it from men.

55. It is true that I have seen among the common people some who, by their
excellent behaviour and morals, were not surpassed by any wise man, any
scholarly, self-controlled man. But this is very rare. And I have seen men who
have studied the different branches of knowledge, who have a good knowledge of
the messages of the Prophets !pbuh and the advice of the philosophers and who
nevertheless surpass the most wicked in their bad behaviour, their depravity,
both internal and external. These are the worst of all creatures. This is very
common and I therefore perceive that these two [moral attitudes] are a favour
which is granted or withheld by Allāh Almighty.

[^basri]: Al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī (d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}
100/718 [ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}) was a great Muslim
traditionalist and Ṣūfī ascetic. In the history of Islām he looms large for
his literary writings and moral sayings. See Ibn Khallikān, _Wafayāt_ (Cairo:
Bulaq, n.d.) vol.\ 1, p.\ 227. He was born and lived in Basra, southern Iraq.

[^plato]: Plato, the famous Greek philosopher, d.\ 347
[bc]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}, disciple of Socrates, visited Egypt
and lived there for one year and learned before Egyptian wise men in ʿAyn
Shams. Jamāl al-Dīn Abū al-Ḥasan al-Qafṭī, _Tārikh al-Ḥukamāʾ_, edited by
Julius Lippert (Leipzig, 1903) p.\ 16, also Abū Sulaymān al-Manṭiqī
al-Sijistānī, _Ṣiwān al-Ḥikmah wa Thalāth Rasāʾil_, edited by A. Badawī,
(Tehran, 1974) p.\ 84, 128ff.

[^vuzurgmihr]: Vuzurgmihr was the minister of the ancient Persian king,
Khusrau Nushirwan, and his son's tutor. He is famous for his wise sayings,
which are often quoted in Arabic sources, and he is said to have been the
first to translate the Indian text _Kalila wa Dimna_ into the Persian
language.

