
# Brothers, Friends, and Advice

120. Anyone who criticizes you cares about your friendship. Anyone who makes
light of your faults cares nothing about you.

121. Criticizing a friend is like melting an ingot:[^mean-ingot] it will either become
refined or it will disappear.

122. A friend who conceals a secret which concerns you is more disloyal
towards you than one who tells a secret of yours. For the one who tells your
secret is simply betraying you, but the one who conceals one from you is
betraying you and also mistrusting you.

123. Do not try to be friends with those who scorn you. You will gain nothing
from it but deception and shame.

124. Do not scorn those who try to be friends with you; to do so is a form of
injustice and it would be failing to respond to their kindness, and this is
bad.

125. Anyone who is forced to mix with men should on no account tell his
companion everything that passes through his mind. When he leaves him, he must
always behave as if he were a desperate enemy. When he wakes up each morning
he should always expect his friends to betray him and do evil, expect them to
behave exactly like his sworn enemies. If nothing of the sort happens, he
should praise Allāh; if it does, then at least he will prepared and the shock
will be less. For myself, I tell you I had a friend who had sworn friendship,
sincere pure friendship, for bad times or good, for richer or poorer, in anger
and in satisfaction. This friend changed his attitude towards me, in a most
hateful way, after twelve years of perfect friendship, and for an absolutely
futile reason which I would never have believed could influence such a man. He
has never reconciled with me since, and this has made me very sad for many
years.

    However, one should not do bad things and follow the example of
    wicked men and traitors.

126. On the contrary, we should learn from this example the path that we
should take. It is perilous and difficult to follow and a man would do well to
advance as carefully as the pin-tailed sandgrouse,[^sandgrouse] more
cautiously than the magpie,[^magpie] until he turns off the road trodden by
mankind and makes his way towards his Lord. This road leads to victory, so we
are told by religion and also by the world. The man who follows it will keep
the pure intention of healthy souls who are true to their promises, men
without guile[^mean-guile] and trickery. He will possess the virtues of the elect and the
characters of the virtuous. Moreover, he will feel as safe as the worst
deceivers, as free from care as the evildoers, as the most wicked and cunning
people.

127. You should keep any secret that is confided to you, and not reveal it to
any friend or stranger, even the man closest to you, if you are at all able to
keep it. You should be true to everyone who trusts you, and do not yourself
trust in anyone in affairs which you want to succeed except when absolutely
necessary, and even then you should stop and think again and make a personal
effort and draw strength from Allāh.

128. Be generous with your superfluous possessions and strength to help
others, whether they ask you or not, and to help anyone who needs you and whom
you are able to help, even if he does not expressly come to you for help.

129. Do not expect any help in return from anyone except Allāh, the Almighty and
Great. As you go on your way always remember that the first person you help
will be the first to do harm and turn against you. Indeed, because of their
profound jealousy, men of bad character detest those that help them when they
see that the latter are better off.

130. [In your social life] treat every human being as graciously as you can.
If someone comes to you with defects and problems such as arise in the normal
course of life, do not let them know that you do not like them. In this way
you shall live in peace and quiet.

131. When you give advice, do not give it only on condition that it will be
taken. Do not intercede only on the condition that your intercession is
accepted; do not make a gift only on the condition that you will be
recompensed. Do it only in order to practise virtue, and to do what you should
do when giving advice, interceding, and being generous.

132. The definition of friendship: [it is the middle point] between two
extremes. What makes one friend sad makes the other sad too. What makes one
happy makes the other happy too. Any relationship less than this is not
friendship. Anyone who answers to this description is a friend. A man may be
the friend of someone who is not his friend for a man can love someone who
hates him. This is the case above all with fathers and their sons, brother and
brother, husband and wife, and all those in whom friendship has become burning
love. Not every friend is a counsellor although every counsellor, by giving
advice shows himself to be a friend.

133. The definition of advice is that the man giving it feels bad about what
harms his friend, whether the latter feels good or bad about it, and he feels
happy about what is good for him, whether his friend is happy or unhappy about
it. This is the added factor which a counsellor has which goes beyond the
limit of simple friendship.

134. The highest aim of friendship---and there is nothing higher than
this---is to have all things in common, one's own person, one's belongings,
without any constraint, and to prefer one's friend to every other being. If I
had not known Muẓaffar and Mubārak, the two masters of Valencia, I should have
thought that such a sentiment had disappeared in our times. But I have never
seen any two other men draw so deeply on all the joys of friendship, despite
events which would have separated other men.

135. There is no virtue which so much resembles a vice as the faculty of
having many friends and acquaintances. But it is really a perfect virtue, made
up of various qualities, since friends are only gained by tolerance,
generosity, patience, loyalty, signs of affection, shared feelings, and
moderation. It is important to protect one's friends, teach them what one
knows, and to win over them by every kind of praiseworthy action.

    We do not mean mercenaries, or those who follow us in our days of glory.
    They are thieves of the title of friendship; they deceive friendship. You
    think that they are friends but they are not. The proof is that they
    abandon you when fortune abandons you. Nor do we mean those who make
    friends for a particular purpose, nor do we mean drinking companions, not
    those who gang together to commit crimes or villainy, to attack people's
    honour, to satisfy their unhealthy curiosity, or for any other useless
    objective. These are not friends at all. The proof is that they speak evil
    of each other, and that they disperse as soon as the evil interests which
    brought them together are finished. We only mean to speak of those pure
    friends who unite only in the love of Allāh, either to help each other to
    make some real virtue triumph or to taste the pleasures of the only true
    kind of friendship.

    If one commits the fault of having too many friends, there is the difficulty
    of keeping them all happy, the dangers of associating with them, the duties
    which fall on us when they are subjected to trials (for if you betray them or
    let them down, you will be criticized and blamed; but if on the other hand you
    are true to them, you will harm yourself to the extent that you could lose
    your own life, and this choice is the only one acceptable to the virtuous man
    if he wishes to be true to his friendship); if one thinks of the worries which
    we have from the misfortunes which come upon them or which come upon us
    because of them: death, separation, betrayal of one among them, one will see
    that the joy brought by these friends is outweighed by the painful sadness
    which they cause.

136. There is nothing among the vices which is so like a virtue as the desire
to be praised. Indeed, if someone sings our praises in our presence, we would
be silly to believe it, knowing everything that the Tradition has taught us
about flatterers. However, praise may be useful in encouraging someone to do
fewer bad things and more good things. It may lead the person who hears it to
desire to have a character similar to the one who has been praised. Thus I
feel that rulers of the world met one of those people who spread evil wherever
they go and who are said to have done evil things, and he received him with
praise. He had heard his praises sung everywhere, he said; on every side
people spoke of nothing but his good deeds and his generosity. After this the
criminal could not possibly do wrong!

137. Certain kinds of advice are difficult to distinguish from slander for
anyone who hears a man criticising someone else unjustly or unfairly and
conceals it from the person who is the object of this unjust and wicked
statement, by doing this is so unjust and to be blamed. Moreover, if he breaks
it to him bluntly, he may bring more trouble upon the spiteful critic than the
latter really deserved. This would be unfair to him, for it is not fair to
punish ill-doers beyond the measure of their unjust deed. It is difficult for
anyone except a very intelligent man to cope with this situation.

138. The solution to be adopted by the intelligent man in such a situation is
to protect the victim against the slanderer, and no more, and not inform him
what the latter said; this is to prevent him going to the slanderer and
getting into more trouble. As for sly tricks, one should protect the victim,
but nothing more than that.

139. Giving information consists of reporting to someone something one has
heard which in no way harms the person one tells it to, strength is from
Allāh.

140. Advice can be given twice. The first time is prescribed as a religious
duty. The second time is a reminder and a warning. If you repeat the advice a
third time it becomes a remonstrance[^mean-remonstrance] and a reprimand.
After that you have to slap and punch and perhaps try even more serious
methods which may cause harm and damage. Certainly, it is only in questions of
religious practices that it is permissible to repeat advice incessantly,
whether the listener accepts it or gets irritated, whether the advisor suffers
from it or not. When you give advice, give it softly, do not shout it out; use
hints, do not speak openly unless you are advising someone who is determined
not to understand. Then explanations would be essential. Do not give advice
only on condition that it is followed. Otherwise you are a tyrant, not an
adviser; you are demanding obedience, you are not allowing religious feeling
and brotherly spirit their due. Neither reason nor friendship gives you the
right to insist. It is rather the right that a ruler has over his subjects or
a master over his slaves.

<!-- TODO Check the following point -->

141. Do not ask of your friend more than you yourself are prepared to give. To
ask for more is to abuse his friendship. Do not gain except when you will harm
yourself and your behaviour will be detestable.

142. If you find excuses for selfish and greedy men and shut your eyes to
their faults, you are not displaying humanity or virtue. On the contrary, it
is a base and feeble thing to do which encourages them to continue in their
bad attitudes, it applauds and supports them in their wicked actions. Such
indulgence would only be humane when displayed towards the just who are quick
to pardon and to act unselfishly. In that case it is an obligation for a good
man to behave in the same way towards them, above all if they have an urgent
need of such tolerance, and if it is more necessary for them.

143. One might retort, “According to what you say, we should stop being
tolerant, we should stop turning a blind eye when it is a question of our
friends. Friends, enemies, and strangers would all be treated exactly the
same; this cannot be right.” Our reply would be---and may Allāh help us
succeed---nothing but encouragement towards tolerance and unselfishness.

144. You should turn a blind eye not on [the faults of] the greedy but only on
[those of] a true friend. If you wish to know how you should act in this
matter, how you can keep on the path of truth: if there is a situation where
one of two friends needs to be unselfish for the other's sake, each of two
friends should examine the problem and see which of them is in the most urgent
need, the most pressing circumstances. Friendship and humanity then impose on
the other the obligation to be unselfish. If he does not, he is greedy, avid,
and deserves no indulgence since he is acting neither like a friend nor like a
brother.

    If the two find themselves in equal need, in equal straits, true friendship
    would require that they race each other to be the more unselfish. If they
    behave like this, they are both friends. If one of them hastens to be
    unselfish and the other does not, and if this is what usually happens, the
    second is not a friend and there is no need to be friendly towards him. But if
    he would hasten to sacrifice himself in other circumstances then this is a
    pair of true friends.

145. If there is someone in need whom you wish to help, whether the initiative
came from him or from you, do no more than he expects of you, not what you
might personally wish to do. If you overstep the mark, you will deserve not
thanks but blame from him and from others, and you will attract hostility, not
friendship.

146. Do not repeat to your friend things that will make him unhappy and which
it would not benefit him to know. That would be the action of a fool. Do not
hide from him anything that would cause him loss not to know. That would be
the action of a wicked person.

147. Do not be pleased if someone praises you for a quality which you do not
have; on the contrary, be very sorry because it will bring to public attention
that you lack it. To sing such praises is to mock and poke fun, and only an
idiot or an imbecile would be pleased. Do not be sorry if someone criticizes
you for a fault that you do not have; on the contrary, you should be pleased
because your merit will be brought to public attention.

148. On the other hand, you should be pleased to possess a praiseworthy
quality, whether anyone actually praises you for it or not, and you should be
sorry to have a blameworthy fault, whether anyone actually criticizes you for
it or not.

149. Anyone who hears bad things said about the wife of his friend must on no
account tell him, particularly if the person who said them was a slanderer or
libeller[^mean-libeller] or notorious gossip, one of those people who try to
draw attention away from their own faults by increasing the number of people
like themselves; this often happens. As a general rule, it is best to stick to
the truth. Now, in this case, you cannot know whether the statements are true
or false, but you do know that it is a grave sin against your religion to hold
such opinions. However, if you perceive that the same thing is being said from
several gossips, not just one, or if you are able to verify that the statement
is well founded, even if you cannot put your friend in a position to observe
what you have observed, then you should tell him everything, privately and
tactfully. You should say something like “There are many women…” or “Look
after your house, teach your family, avoid this, mind that…” If he takes your
advice and is put on his guard, he will have profited from the chance. If you
notice that he takes no precautions and does not worry about anything, you
must control yourself, not say a word, and remain friends, for the fact that
he has not believed what you have told him does not oblige you to break with
him. But if, having been in a position to observe some definite proof, you are
able to put your friend in a position to see some identical proof, it is your
duty to tell him and to make him face the whole truth. If he changes his
attitude, that is good. But if he will not change his attitude, you should
shun his friendship, because this would be vile man with no virtue and no
noble aspirations.

<!-- TODO I don't understand the last part of the following point -->

150. The fact that a man enters a house secretly is proof enough that he means
ill. The same is true of a woman who enters a man's house secretly. It would be
stupid to require further proof. You should run from such a woman or at least
separate. Anyone who kept her with him would be a virtual go-between.

151. Men can be divided into seven categories according to certain traits of
their characters. Some praise you to your face and criticize you behind your
back. This is the characteristic feature of hypocrites and slanderers; it is
common, mostly among men. Others criticize you to your face and behind your
back. This is characteristic of slanderers who are powerful and insolent. Some
men flatter you to your face and behind your back. This is the mark of
flatterers and social climbers. Others again criticize you to your face and
praise you behind your back. This is characteristic of fools and imbeciles.
Virtuous people take care neither to praise nor to criticize you in your
presence. Either they praise you in your absence, or they refrain from
criticizing you. Slanderers who are not hypocrites or ignorant say nothing to
your face and criticize you in your absence. As for those who want a quiet
life, they take care that they neither praise you nor criticize you, whether
you are present or absent. We have seen these different types of individuals
for ourselves, and we have tested the categories and found them to be true.

152. When you give advice, find a private place and speak gently. Do not say
that somebody else has said the criticisms that you address to your companion,
that would be to speak ill. If your phrase your advice bluntly, you will annoy
and discourage. “Speak to him courteously,” the Almighty has said, “And speak
unto him a gentle word.” (Quran 20:44) And the Prophet !pbuh said, “Do not
discourage him.” If you are advising someone, and you insist on seeing your
advice taken, you are doing wrong since you could be mistaken and you would be
insisting on him accepting your error and rejecting the truth.

153. Everything has its use. Thus, I have profited greatly from mixing with
the ignorant. This has inspired my inward self, it has sparked off my spirit,
it has sharpened my mind, it has driven me to action. It has given rise to
written works of some value. If the ignorant had not roused something deep
within myself, if they had not woken something that lay hatching in me, I
would not have thrown myself into writing these works.

154. Do not blind yourself to a friend by taking a wife from his family; do
not sign a contract with him. We have never known these two acts to result in
anything but rupture, where ignorant people would expect the ties of
friendship to be strengthened. Not so, and the reason is that the two acts
force each party to press his own interests to the advantage of others. When
there is a clash of individual interests, quarrels result, quarrels bring
about an alteration in affections. The firmest alliance is one between two
people who are already related, because the fact that they are already related
forces them to bear the union, even if they are very unhappy, since they are
joined by an unbreakable tie, that of their common origin, which nature
obliges them to defend and protect.

