# Treatment of Corrupt Character

223. A man who is subject to pride should think of his faults. If he is proud
of his virtues, he should seek out what is mean in his character. And if his
faults are so well hidden from him that he thinks he has none, let him know
that his misfortune will last forever, that he is the worst of men, that he
has the worst faults of all, and is the least perceptive.

224. In the first place, he is weak in mind and ignorant. No fault is worse
then these two, for a wise man is one who sees his own faults, fights against
them, and tries to overcome them. A fool ignores them because he has little
knowledge and discernment and his thoughts are feeble, possibly because he
takes his faults to be good qualities, and there is nothing on earth worse
than this.

225. There are many who boast of having committed adultery, homosexuality
[acts of child abuse], theft, and other sins, and are proud of these stains
and of the aptitudes that they deployed in these shameful acts.

226. Know well that nobody upon earth is free of all faults except the Prophets,
may Allāh bless them.

227. A man who does not see his own faults is a fallen being; he comes to be
so from baseness, turpitude,[^mean-turpitude] stupidity and feebleness of
intelligence, and lack of discernment and understanding, to such a point that
he is no different from vile men and it is not possible to drop lower into
degradation than he has. Let him save his soul by seeking out his own faults
and turning his attention to them instead of his pride and the faults of
others, the doing of which harms him neither in this world or the next.

228. I do not know of any benefit to be drawn from hearing about the faults of
other people except that he who hears about them may learn the lesson, avoid
them, and seek to cure himself of them with Allāh's assistance and might.

229. To speak of the faults of others is a serious shame which is absolutely
not acceptable. One should avoid doing it except when one wishes to advise
someone whom one fears to fall into the clutches of the person who is
criticising or when one only wishes to reprimand a boastful person, which
should be done to his face and not behind his back.

<!-- Check the Quran reference in the following paragraph -->

230. Then you should say to the boastful man, “Turn around and look at
yourself. When you have perceived your own faults, you will have found the
cure for your pride. Do not compare yourself with someone who has more faults
than you do so that you find it easy to commit faults and imitate wicked
people. [Do not allow yourself to commit vile things and imitate wicked
people]. We have already criticized people who imitate good actions slavishly,
what should we say of people who imitate evil actions slavishly? On the
contrary, you should compare yourself with someone who is more virtuous than
you, then your pride will fade away. Then you will be cured of this hateful
disease which gave birth in you to scorn of other people when there are
without a doubt better people than you among them. If you scorn them with no
cause, they will have cause to scorn you, for the Almighty says, [“To condone
an evil is to commit the same evil.”][^not-exist] “The reward of an evil is an
evil like it.” (Quran 42:20) So you will expose yourself to scorn, even to
deserved disdain and the anger of Allāh, and the loss of every trace of virtue
that there may have been in you.

[^not-exist]: Typesetter: This phrase exists in the original hard copy of _In Pursuit of Virtue_ as well. I checked for it in the original Arabic from two sources: (1) _Rasāʾil Ibn Ḥazm_, vol.\ 1, #161, p.\ 387 (Beirut: Al-Muʾassasah al-ʿArabiyyah li al-Dirāsāt wa al-Nashr, 1987) revised by Dr. Iḥsān ʿAbbās and (2) _Kitāb al-Akhlāq wa al-Siyar_, #173, p.\ 157 (Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 2000) checked by ʿAbd al-Ḥaq al-Turkmānī. These sources did not have this phrase.

231. If you are proud of your intelligence, remember all the bad thoughts that
come into your mind and the deceitful hopes which assail you, then you will
realize how feeble your intelligence is.

232. If you are proud of your personal ideas remember your mistakes, keep them
in your memory, do not forget them: think of all the times you have believed
yourself right and you have been right and you have been wrong. If you do
this, you will see that in most cases you have been wrong about as often as
right. The score will come out about equal. But it is more likely that your
mistakes will be more numerous because this is the case with every human being
except the Prophets !s[them]!.

233. If you are proud of your good works, remember your times of rebellion,
your faults, your life in all its aspects. Ah, by Allāh, then you will find
that they outnumber your good works and it will make your good deeds
forgotten. So you should worry about this for a long time and replace your
pride with self-disdain.

234. If you are proud of your knowledge, you should know that it is no credit
to you, it is a pure gift that Allāh has granted you. Do not receive it in a
way that would anger the Almighty because He might wipe it from you by
subjecting you to an illness which would make you forget all that you have
learned and stored in your memory. I have been told that this happened to ʿAbd
al-Malik bin Ṭarīf [d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 400/1009
[ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}], who was a scholar, intelligent,
moderate, exact in his researches, who had been allotted by fate such a
prodigious memory that virtually nothing reached his ears that had to be said
to him twice. Now he undertook a journey by ship and experienced such a
terrible storm at sea that he lost the memory of most of what he had learnt
and suffered considerable upset to his mind. He never recovered his full
intelligence. I myself have been struck by illness. When I recovered from it,
I had forgotten all my knowledge except for a few ideas of little value. I did
not regain it until several years later.

235. You should also know that there are many people greedy for knowledge, who
devote themselves to reading, to study, and to research but do not reap any
benefit from it. A scholar should realize that it is enough to pursue
knowledge, many others will rank higher than him. Knowledge is truly a gift
from Allāh. So what place is there for pride? One can only feel humble, give
thanks to Allāh Almighty and beg Him to increase His gifts and not to withhold
them.

236. You should also remember that everything that remains hidden from you,
everything that you do not know of the different branches of knowledge, the
aspects that you have specialized in, and that you are proud to have
penetrated [nevertheless, what you do not know] is greater than what you _do_
know. You should therefore replace your pride with scorn and self-disdain,
that would be better. Think of those who are more knowledgeable than you---you
will find that there are many of them---and may your spirit be humble in your
own sight.

237. You should also remember that you may be deceived by knowledge, for if
you do not put into practice what you know your knowledge will be a testimony
against you and it would have been better for you if you had never been a
scholar. For you should remember that an ignorant man is wiser than you, he is
in a better position, he is more excusable. May your pride then completely
disappear.

238. Moreover, the knowledge that you are so proud of having penetrated is
perhaps one of the less important branches of knowledge, of no great value,
such as poetry or suchlike. You should then remember the man whose branch of
study is more noble than yours on the scale of this world and the next, and
your soul should become humble in your own sight.

239. If you are proud of your courage, remember those who are more valiant
than you. Then examine what you do with your courage that Allāh has granted you.
If you waste it in rebellion against Allāh, you are a fool for you are losing
your soul by committing acts of no value to it. If you use your courage in
obedience to Allāh, you are spoiling it by your pride. You should also remember
that your courage will fall away as you grow old and if you live so long you
will become dependent, as weak as a baby.

240. It is true that I have never seen less pride than among the brave, and to
my mind that proves the purity, greatness, and majesty of their spirits.

241. If you are vain because you are strong, remember those who may rise
against you, your peers, your equals, and men who may be perverse, feeble, and
vile. But you should remember that they are equal to you in the strength you
possess even if you would be ashamed to be like them because of their extreme
baseness, ignominy of the souls, their morals, and their origins. You should
despise any honours which make you the colleague of such men as I have just
described, even if you owned the whole world and you had no
opponent---something that is far from likely, since no one has ever heard tell
of one man owning the whole inhabited world, even when it was still small and
of limited dimensions compared with the uninhabited areas. And just think how
tiny it is compared with the celestial sphere that surrounds the universe!

242. Remember what was said by Ibn al-Sammāk [Abū al-ʿAbbās Muḥammad ibn
Ṣubayḥ, d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 183/799
[ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}] to al-Rashīd when the latter asked to
be brought a cup of drinking water: “Commander of the faithful, if you were
refused this drink, how much would you offer to get it?”

    “My entire kingdom,” replied al-Rashīd.

    “Commander of the faithful,” Ibn al-Sammāk continued, “if you found that
    you could not pass water (i.e. urine) from you body, how much would you
    sacrifice to able to do so?”

    “My entire kingdom.”

    “O Commander of the faithful, how can you boast of a kingdom which is not
    worth as much as a little urine and a few mouthfuls of water?”^[See Ibn
    Khallikān, _Wafayāt_, vol.\ 2, p.\ 296.] Ibn al-Sammāk was right, Allāh grant
    him peace.

243. If you were king of all the Muslims, you should remember that the king of
Sudan, a disreputable black man, an ignorant man who does not cover his
private parts, has a larger kingdom than yours. If you say, “I have taken it
by right,” [no], upon my life, you have not taken it by right if it is a
source of arrogance in you and you do not use your position to bring justice.
You should be ashamed of your position; it is a state of
turpitude[^mean-turpitude], not a state to feel proud of.

244. If you take pride in your wealth, that is the worst degree of pride.
Think of all the vile and debauched men who are richer than you and do not
take pride in something in which they outdo you. You should realize that it is
stupid to take pride in possessions; riches are burdens which bring no benefit
until you dispose of them and spend them according to the law. Wealth is also
ephemeral and fleeing. It can escape, and you can find it again anywhere,
perhaps in someone else's hands, perhaps in the hands of your
enemy.[^plato-words] To take pride in your wealth is stupid, to put your trust
in good fortune is a trap and a weakness.

[^plato-words]: This passage reminds us of Plato's words: “Do not amass gold
and silver because the [future] husbands of your [widowed] wives, who will
gloat over your demise and ridicule you, will inherit it, while the guilty
conscience remains yours alone.” [See _Mukhtār min Kalām al-Ḥukamāʾ al-Arbaʿa
al-Akābir_ in _Dimitri Gutas: Greek Wisdom Literature in Arabic Translation. A
study of the Graeco--Arabic Gnomologia_ (New Haven: American Oriental
Society, 1975), p.\ 129.

245. If you take pride in your beauty, think of the harm it gives rise to,
which we would be ashamed to put into words. You yourself will be ashamed of
it when your beauty disappears with age. But in saying this we have said
enough.

246. If the praises heaped on you by your friends make you vain, think of the
criticism that your enemies direct at you. Then your pride will melt away. And
if you have no enemies, then you have no good in you at all, for there is
nothing lower on the scale of values than the man who has no enemies. That
position is reserved for people who have not received from Allāh a single favour
worth envying (Allāh preserve us from being in this position!) If you think that
your faults are slight, imagine someone else looking at them and think what he
would say about them. Then you will feel shame and will know the measure of
your faults, if you have the slightest discernment.

247. If you study the laws that regulate human nature and the development of
different characters according to the mixture of elements rooted in their
souls, you will surely become convinced that you have no merit from your own
virtues, that they are only gifts from the Almighty, which, if He had granted
to another, would have made him just like you, and you will realize that, left
to your own devices, you would collapse and die. You would replace your pride
that you take in your virtues with acts of grace towards the One who gave them
to you, and with the fear of losing them, for even the most admirable
characters can be altered by illness, poverty, fear, anger, or the decrepitude
of old age. Show compassion towards those who lack the gifts that you have
received, and do not risk losing them by seeking to raise yourself above the
One who gave them by claiming merit for yourself or rights in what He has
granted to you, or by thinking that you can dispense with His protection, for
without it you would perish at once and forever.

248. [For example,] I once suffered a severe illness that caused enlargement
of the spleen. I became anguished, peevish, impatient, and touchy, and I
reproached myself for this, not being willing to face the fact that my
character had changed. I was extremely surprised that I had lost my good
characteristics. In this way I had good proof that the spleen is the centre of
good temper, and that when it is diseased, bad temper is the result.

249. If you take pride in your ancestry, that is even worse than everything we
have mentioned so far, since it is pride in something that has no real
usefulness for you in this world or the next. Just ask yourself whether your
ancestry protects you against hunger, or dishonour, or whether it does you any
good in the next world.

<!-- TODO Double check the following with the book -->

250. Next, consider those who are equally well descended, or even better,
those who are descended from the Prophets !s[them] or their successors, from
the virtuous companions of Muḥammad or from scholars; then remember those who
are descended from non-Arab kings, the Khosrau,^[Khosrau or Chosroes is a
designation of the ancient Persian kings in general.] and Caesars, those who
are descended from the Tubbaʿ and the various kings of Islam. Consider what
remains of them and what has survived. Observe those who boast of their
ancestry as you do of yours, and you will see that most of them are as ignoble
as dogs. You will find that they are low, extremely vile, and unreliable; you will
find that they are adorned with the very worst of characteristics.

251. Therefore, you should not boast of something in which such people are
your equals or even superior to you. The ancestors which make you so proud may
have been debauched,[^mean-debauched] drunken, licentious,[^mean-licentious]
frivolous,[^mean-frivolous] and stupid. Circumstances allowed them to become
despots[^mean-despots] and tyrants; they left an infamous record which will
perpetuate their shame for ever. Their crime is immense and their
repentance[^mean-repentance] shall be immense on the day of the Last Judgment.
Since this is the case, remember that you are taking pride in something that
shares in vice, ignominy,[^mean-ignominy] shame, and dishonour; it is not
something to be admired.

252. If you are proud of your descent from virtuous ancestors, how empty their
virtue will leave your hands if you yourself are not virtuous! How little
pride your ancestors will have in you in this world and the next if you do no
good! All men are children of Ādam whom Allāh created by His own Hand, giving him
Paradise for a dwelling place and letting His angels bow down before him. But
how little is the advantage they have since all the vices dwell in mankind and
all the wicked impious people in the world are among their number.

253. When the wise man considers that the virtues of his ancestors do not
bring him any closer to his Lord Almighty and do not win him any favour which
he could not have gained by luck in a competition or by his own virtue, not by
his wealth, what sense is there in taking pride in a descent which is of no
use to him? Someone who feels proud of it, is he not like someone who feels
proud of his neighbour's wealth, or a third person's glory, or another's horse
because it once wore a bridle that had been his property? It is, as people
say, “Like a eunuch who takes pride in his father's potency.”

254. If your pride leads you to boast, you will be doubly guilty, because your
intelligence will have shown that it is incapable of controlling your pride.

255. This would be true if you had a good reason to boast, so imagine what it
is like if you have no good reason. Nuḥ's son, Ibrāhīm's father, and Abū
Lahab, the uncle of the Prophet---May Allāh grant him blessings, as well as to
Nuḥ and Ibrāhīm---these were the closest relations of Allāh's most virtuous
creatures out of all the sons of Ādam. To achieve nobility, it would have been
enough to follow in their footsteps. But they drew no benefit from it.

256. Among those who have been born illegitimate, some have risen to the
highest positions in control of the world's affairs, for example Ziyād [bin
Abīh (d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 53/672
[ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"})] and Abū Muslim al-Khurasānī [d.\
[ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 129/746
[ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}]. There have been others who have
attained supreme virtue, like those whom we respect too highly to name them in
this context. We come nearer to Allāh if we love them and model our lives on
their glorious achievements.

257. If you take pride in your physical strength, remember that the mule, the
donkey, and the bull are stronger than you, and better suited to carrying
heavy loads. If you feel vain[^mean-vain] about the lightness of your running style,
remember that the dog and hare surpass you in this field. It is extremely
curious that rational beings feel proud of something in which they are
surpassed by dumb animals.

258. You should know that a man who has pride or a feeling of superiority
buried deep in his soul should measure how well he tolerates anxieties,
adversity, pain, toil, or the worries and misfortunes which plague him. If he
realizes that he tolerates them with a bad grace, he should remember that all
those who are subjected to trials, those who are starving and have nothing to
eat for example, all those who suffer patiently, they have more merit than he
does, despite their weaker understanding. However, if he finds that he is
capable of endurance, let him remember that this makes him no more exceptional
that those we have just mentioned; he may be inferior to them, or their equal,
but he is not their superior.

<!-- TODO I don't understand the last sentence. Double check with the Arabic. -->

259. Next, let him consider his conduct. Does he act fairly or unfairly when
he makes use of the gifts which Allāh has granted him: money, power, slaves,
health, or fame? If he finds that he has failed in his obligation to feel
grateful towards the Almighty Benefactor, if he finds that he is at the
extreme edge of fairness, bordering on injustice, he should remember that
people who are just, grateful, and honest have been more favoured than he
and are more virtuous than he. If he considers that he does love justice let
him remember that a just man is far from being proud because he knows the real
importance of things, the real value of characters, and he loves the happy
medium which is the balance between two bad extremes; on the contrary, he must
incline towards one of these bad extremes.

260. You should remember that if you oppress or maltreat beings whose fate has
been entrusted to you by Allāh as slaves or subjects, this shows that you have
an ignoble soul, a vile spirit, and a weak intelligence. Indeed, a wise man with
his noble spirit, his elevated thoughts, fights only against people as strong
as himself, his peers in potency; but to attack those who cannot defend
themselves is the sign of a vile nature, a depraved soul and character, it
shows you to be incapable and dishonorable. A man who behaved like this would
descend to the level of someone who was pleased to have killed a rat, to have
exterminated a flea, or to have squashed a louse. There is nothing more base or
vile.

261. Remember that it is harder to tame the self than to tame wild beasts. In
fact, when wild beasts are shut inside cages ordered for them by kings, they
cannot harm you. But the self, even if it were put in a prison, could not be
guaranteed to do you no harm.

262. Pride is like a tree trunk; its branches are complacency,
presumptuousness,[^mean-presumptuousness] haughtiness,[^mean-haughtiness]
arrogance, and superiority. These terms refer to concepts that are very
similar to each other and hard for most people to tell apart. A proud man
becomes proud because of an obvious merit: one man may be vain about his own
scholarship and be haughty and scornful towards others, another may be vain
about his deeds and believe himself to be eminent and superior. One man is
proud of his own judgment and becomes arrogant; another is self-satisfied and
becomes complacent. Another, full of his own reputation and high standing,
becomes self-important and haughty.

263. The lowest degree of pride is when you refrain from laughing when
laughter is not out of place; you avoid quick movements and responses except
when it is unavoidable in daily life. However, such a fault is very serious.
To behave in this way in order to get on with one's work and to avoid
time-wasting nonsense would even be a praiseworthy virtue. But these people
only behave like this out of disdain for others and from pride in themselves,
and so they deserve only blame, for deeds are of value according to the
intentions of the doer, and every being shall be rewarded according to what he
intended.^[This is a part of a _ḥadīth_ reported by ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb and
related by al-Bukhārī and Muslim.]

264. Next, a more serious case is when you are not clever enough to keep pride
within its rightful limits, when your spirit is too weak, and you reach the
point of showing disdain and scorn towards other people by your words and
deeds. Then, going even further, when your sense and your spirit are even
weaker, you reach the point of desiring to harm people with words and with
blows, to give them orders, to commit abuses, to tyrannize them, to exact where
possible, obedience and submission from them. When he is unable to do this,
the proud man sings his own praises and contents himself with criticizing
other people and mocking them.

<!-- TODO check the following paragraph -->

265. Pride can also exist for no good reason and where there is no merit in
the proud person; this is the strangest thing about it. The popular phrase for
it is “_Mutamandil_ discernment.” It is often found in women or in men whose
spirit is rather effeminate. It is the pride of someone who has absolutely no
good quality: neither knowledge, nor courage, nor high social standing, nor
noble descent, nor fortune, which might give him abusive authority.

    And, what is more, such a man knows that he is a non-entity in every way, for
    even the idiot that has stones thrown at him knows this. The only person who
    can deceive himself is one who has a small part of some good qualities. For
    example, a man who is endowed with a little brain might imagine himself to
    have reached the extreme limits of intelligence; someone with a little
    scientific knowledge might imagine himself to be a perfect expert. Someone
    whose genealogy has [obscure] bad origins and whose ancestors were not even
    great tyrants is more infatuated with himself than if he were the son of the
    [mighty] Pharaoh of the forces.^[This is a Quranic expression. See (Quran 89:10)]
    If he has some value as a warrior he thinks he can put ʿAlī [bin Abī Ṭālib] to
    flight, capture al-Zubayr [bin al-ʿAwwām] and slay Khālid [bin al- Walīd]. If
    he is at all notorious, he holds Alexander the Great in small esteem. If he is
    capable of gaining a little money and to obtain a little more than the
    absolute necessities of life, he is as proud of it as if he had got hold of
    the sun by its horns. However, pride among such men, even if they are
    admirable fellows, is not common.

    However, it is common among those who have a iota of knowledge, nobility,
    fortune, reputation, or courage. They are dragged along by others, and they
    trample on those who are weaker than themselves. Although they are perfectly
    aware that they themselves are lacking in all good qualities and have none
    whatsoever, they are still haughty and insolent.

266. I took the opportunity of asking one such man---gently and
tactfully---what was the cause of his sense of superiority and his disdain of
others. The only answer I could get was this: “I am a free man,” he said, “I
am nobody's slave.”

    I replied “Most people that one meets share this same quality with you.
    Like you, they are free men, except for a certain number of slaves who are
    more generous than you and who give orders to you and to many other free
    men.” I could not get anything else out of him.

267. I returned to consideration of their case, going into the matter deeply.
I thought about it for years on end, trying to find the reasons which drove
them to pride that was so unjustified. I searched the recesses of their souls
incessantly, on the basis of what their words reflected of their situation and
their intentions. I came to the conclusion that they imagined themselves to
have a superior intelligence and perception and a good sense of judgment.
[They believed that] if fate had allowed them to make use of these talents,
they would have had immense possibilities, they would have known how to direct
powerful kingdoms, and their merit would have appeared superior to that of
other men. If they had a fortune, they would have been very good at spending
it. And this is the angle by which vanity has taken possession of them and
pride has penetrated their souls.

268. Here one might make curious digressions and [point out] certain
paradoxes. It is a fact that no virtue except that of intelligence and
perception allows one to believe that one is a past master in it, and the more
one is completely sure that one has attained perfection in it, the more one
lacks it.

    This is so much the case that one will see a raving lunatic or an
    inveterate sot[^mean-inveterate-sot] making fun of a sane man. A mentally
    deficient person will mock men who are wise, virtuous, and knowledgeable.
    Little boys shout after grown men. Men who are stupid and insolent disdain
    men who are intelligent and reserved. Even the weakest women think that
    the spirit and opinions of great men lack vigour. In sum, the weaker the
    intelligence the more man imagines himself well endowed and in possession
    of excellent powers of perception. This is not at all the case with other
    qualities: someone who has none of them knows that he lacks them. Error
    only arises in a man who has a small portion, even if it is tiny, because
    he then imagines---if he has limited powers of perception---that he
    possesses this quality to the highest degree.

269. The cures for pride among such people are poverty and obscurity; there is
nothing more effective, for if not awed they are bad and a considerable
nuisance to other men. You find them doing nothing but discrediting people,
attacking their reputations, mocking at everybody, scorning all rights, and
permitting themselves every indiscretion. They go to the limit, to the point
of risking injury to themselves, and entering into dispute. They even come to
blows and punches for the most futile cause that presents itself.

270. It can happen that pride lies hidden in the depths of a man's heart and
does not appear until he meets with some success or acquires some fortune and
his good sense can neither control nor conceal this feeling.

<!-- TODO Reconsider "in all self-esteem." -->

271. Something that I have seen that is very curious---among certain weak
creatures---is that they are so dominated by a deep love for their grandchild
or their wife that they describe them in public as extremely intelligent. They
go as far as to say, “She is more intelligent than me and I regard her advice
as a blessing.” They praise her beauty, her charm, her vivacity[^mean-vivacity]---this often
happens with very feeble men---and do it so much and so well that if they
wished to find her a husband they need say nothing more in order to make
someone desire her from their description. Such behaviour is only found among
souls which are weak and lacking in all self-esteem.

272. Take care not to boast, because nobody will believe you, even if you are
telling the truth. On the contrary, they will take everything that you have
said when boasting about yourself and use it as the basis of their criticism
of you.

273. Take care not to praise someone to his face; this would be to behave like
a vile flatterer.

274. Also take care not to pretend to be poor. You will not gain anything
except to be treated as a liar or to be scorned by anyone who listens to you.
You will have no benefit from it except that you will fail to recognize the
gifts you have from the Lord, and if you complain about it to anyone they will
have no pity on you.

276. You should also take care not to display your wealth for all that you
will achieve is that those who hear you will covet what you possess.

277. Be content to offer thanks to the Almighty, to confide your needs to Him,
and to take notice of those who are inferior to Him. In this way you will keep
your dignity, and those who envy you will leave you alone.

278. A wise man is one who does not neglect the duties imposed upon him by
intelligence.

279. Anyone who tempts others with his riches has no choice but to share them
out---and there would be no end to this---or to refuse them which would make
him seem mean and would attract universal hostility. If you wish to give
something to somebody, do it of your own initiative and before he asks for it;
this is more noble, more disinterested and more worthy of praise.

280. Something peculiar about envy is when you hear a jealous person say, when
someone has done original work in some branch of science, “What a silly
person! Nobody has ever put forward that hypothesis before and nobody has ever
believed that.” But if the same person hears someone expound an idea which is
not new, he exclaims. “What a silly person! This is not a new idea!” This sort
of person is harmful because he is bent on obstructing the path of knowledge
and turning people away from it in order to increase the number of his own
sort, the ignorant.

281. The wisdom of the wise man brings him no profit in the eyes of a wicked
man; the latter thinks that he is as wicked as himself. Thus I have seen vile
creatures imagine in their vile souls that everybody was like themselves; they
would never believe that it was possible, in one way or another, not to have
their faults. There is no character more corrupt; there is none more remote
from being virtuous and good. Anyone who is in this state cannot hope to be
cured at all. Allāh help us in all matters.

282. Justice is a fortress in which all who are frightened take refuge. In
fact, if a tyrant feels oppressed, does he not call for justice and scorn and
condemn injustice? But you never see the opposite, someone condemning justice.
Therefore a man who is equitable by nature can rest at peace in this
impregnable fortress.

283. Scorn is a variety of treachery, for someone can be disloyal towards you
without scorning you, but if he scorns you he is betraying the impartiality he
should show towards you. Therefore every scornful man is disloyal, but not
every disloyal man is scornful.

284. If you scorn a thing it shows that you scorn the man who possesses it.

285. There are two circumstances in which it is good to do something which
would otherwise be bad: it is when one wishes to reproach someone or to
present excuses to someone. In these two cases, it is permissible to list past
benefits and recall gifts. In all cases except these two, it would be in the
worst possible taste.

286. We should not criticise someone who has a natural tendency towards a
vice---even if it were the worst possible fault, the greatest of vices---as
long as he does not let it appear in anything he says or does. He would almost
deserve more commendation than someone who naturally inclines towards virtue,
for it takes a strong and virtuous mind to control a corrupt natural
inclination.

287. To attack a man's conjugal honour is worse than to attack his life.

288. To a well-born man, honour is dearer than gold. A well-born man should
use his gold to protect his body, his body to protect his soul, his soul to
protect his honour, and his honour to defend his religion. But he must never
sacrifice his religion in defense of anything whatsoever.

289. To attack a man's honour is less serious than to steal from his property.
The proof of this is that almost nobody, not even the most virtuous, can say
that he has never attacked anyone's honour, though it may have been only
rarely. But to have stolen someone's property, whether on a small scale or a
large scale, is definitely the deed of a vile person and far from virtue.

290. Drawing analogies between different situations is mostly deceptive and it
can be quite false. This form of argument is not acceptable in problems which
concern religion.

291. A man who blindly follows another slavishly is asking to be cheated out
of his own thoughts when he would consider it the greatest crimes to be
cheated out of his money. He is equally wrong in both cases.

292. A man who considers it hateful to be tricked out of his fortune, and
regards it as the worst of crimes, must have an ignoble character, a mean
spirit, and a soul worthy of disdain.

293. Anyone who does not know where to find virtue should rely on the
commandments of Allāh and His Prophet !pbuh. All the virtues are contained in
these commandments.

294. It is possible to bring about something dangerous by trying to guard
against it. It is possible to let out a secret by trying hard to keep it.
Sometimes it is better to avoid a subject than to raise doubts by dwelling on
it. In each of these cases the harm comes from overdoing it and going beyond
the boundaries of the happy medium.

295. Virtue is the medium between the two extremes [the “too much” and the
“too little”]. These two extremes are to be criticised---and virtue, lying
between them, is to be praised---except when it is a question of intelligence,
and then there can be no excess.

296. It is better to sin by being too strict than by being too soft.

297. It is astonishing to see that virtue is regarded as lovely but difficult,
and vice as awful but easy to commit.

298. A person who wishes to be fair should put himself in his adversary's
position. He will then see the unfairness of his own behaviour.

299. The definition of strictness consists of being able to distinguish friend
from foe. The height of stupidity and weakness is the inability to distinguish
one's foe from one's friend.

300. Do not deliver your enemy to an oppressor, and do not oppress him
yourself. Treat him as you would treat your friend, except for trusting him.
Be careful not to mix with him or help him rise socially; that would be the
behaviour of a fool. Anyone who treats his enemy as equal to his friend in
closeness and in promoting his position only succeeds in making people avoid
his friendship and they find it just as easy to be his enemies. He will only
win the disrespect of his enemy by handing him his vulnerable places, and he
will lose his friend, since the latter will join the ranks of his adversaries.

301. The greatest of good deeds is to refrain from punishing your enemy and
from handing him over to an oppressor. As for mixing with him, that is the
mark of fools who will soon be lost.

302. The worst evil is to oppress your friend. As for keeping him away from
yourself, that would be the action of a man without spirit and destined to
misfortune.

303. Magnanimity[^mean-magnanimity] consists not of mingling with your enemies
but of showing mercy to them while still not trusting them.

<!-- TODO Check the following point for consistency and grammar -->

304. How many men have we not seen take pride in their possessions and so be
lost! Guard against this attitude, it is really harmful and completely
useless. How many men we have seen lost because of something they said. But we
have never heard of anyone being lost because he kept silent. Therefore you
should speak only to please your Creator; and if you fear that what you say
will be abused, then keep silent.

305. I have rarely seen a lost opportunity ever reoccur.

306. A man undergoes many trials during his life, but the worst are those
inflicted by his fellow man. The harm done by man to man is worse than the
harm done by furious beasts and poisoned vipers for you cannot protect
yourself at all against the human race.

307. Hypocrisy is the thing which is most widespread among people. Despite
this, it is amazing to see that people only like those who treat them
hypocritically.

308. If we said that characters are round like a globe because their extremes
meet, we should not be far from the truth. Indeed we see that the consequences
of the two cries for sorrow; too much love makes one commit as many successive
faults as excessive hatred does, and can cause estrangement if the loved one
lacks patience and fairness.

309. If a man is dominated by a natural passion, then however firm and
sensible he is in other ways, he can be overcome if you attack this weak
point.

310. An over-suspicious mind learns to tell lies. Since he often needs to
excuse himself by lying, he is practised in it and finds it easy.

311. The most impartial witness against a man who is given to sincerity is his
face; it clouds over as soon as he tells a lie or is about to do so.

312. The most implacable[^mean-implacable] witness against a liar is his own
tongue; it gets twisted and contradicts itself.

313. It is a greater catastrophe to have an unfaithful friend than to lose
him.

314. Those who show most horror when speaking out loud of shameful acts are
those who are most apt to commit them. This can clearly be seen in the
insolence offered by guttersnipes[^mean-guttersnipe] and the insults of vile
men who have reached the nadir[^mean-nadir] of vileness in practising vile
professions. For example, those men and women who earn a living by playing the
flute, sweeping out farmyards, working as servants in abattoirs, and those who
frequent the [drinking houses] brothel, authorized as meeting places of people
of the lowest class or stable boys. Nobody abuses them more than they abuse
themselves. More than anybody else they cry scandal when they
wallow[^mean-wallow] in it in the first place and have acquired the worst of
reputations by it.

315. Meetings make grudges melt away.^[This is a part of a _ḥadīth_.] One
would think that when glances meet, hearts grow peaceful. Do not torture
yourself if your friend meets your enemy, for the meeting will lessen the
latter's hatred towards you.

316. The worst misfortunes that can come upon men are fear, anxiety, sickness,
and poverty. But the thing that makes the soul suffer most cruelty is the
anxiety of losing what one loves and to see something happen that one hates.
After this comes sickness, then fear, then poverty. The proof of this is that
people would willingly accept poverty to avoid the pains of illness. For a man
quests ardently after health and does not count what he spends to recover it
when he fears death. When his end is certain he would like to be able to give
his entire fortune to be saved and cured. Fear is bearable when it drives off
anxiety, for a man seeks with all his soul to drive away anxiety. The worst of
all illnesses is pain that persists in one organ, always the same.

317. But to be a well-born spirit, humiliation is less bearable than all the
misfortunes we have described. On the other hand, it is the one that knavish[^mean-knavish]
spirits fear the least.
