
# Introduction

In the name of Allāh the Most Merciful and Clement: [O Allāh I implore Your
assistance, O Allāh bless Muḥammad and his family and grant them peace]. Abū
Muḥammad ʿAlī bin Aḥmad bin Saʿīd bin Ḥazm al-Andalusī !p[him] has said:

1. Praise be to Allāh for His great gifts. May Allāh bless [our master]
Muḥammad, His servant, the seal of His Prophets and Messengers; may He grant
them eternal blessings. I rely on Him for any ability and strength I may have,
and I seek His aid and protection against all the various terrors and ills of
this world. And may He deliver me from all horror and suffering in the next
world.

2. Now, I have gathered together in this book numerous ideas which Allāh, the
provider of intellect, has enabled me to profit from as day succeeded day,
[and year succeeded year] and circumstances altered, permitting me to
understand the vicissitudes[^mean-vicissitudes] of fate and to control its
fluctuations, to the extent that I have devoted the larger part of my life to
it. I have chosen to master these problems by study and contemplation, rather
than throw myself into the various sensual pleasures which attract most souls
on this earth, and rather than amass unnecessary wealth. I have gathered
together all my observations into this book in the hope that the Almighty may
allow it to benefit whichever of His servants He wishes who has access to [is
capable of understanding] my book, in the matters over which I have slaved,
devoting all my efforts to them, and reflecting at length upon them. I hope
that it will be well received, and I present it with good intentions and
blessings [with a good heart].

---

This book will benefit a person more than financial treasures and possessions
of property, if he meditates upon it, and if Allāh enables him to make good
use of it. As for myself, my hope in this enterprise is to win the greatest
reward from Allāh, since my intention is to help His servants, to remedy
whatever is corrupt in their character, and to heal the sickness of their
souls. I beseech the assistance of Allāh [Almighty, we wish only for Allāh,
the best of defenders].

