---
title:
  - type: main
    text: Kitāb al-Akhlāq wa Siyar
  - type: subtitle
    text: A book on Morals and Behaviour
creator:
  - role: author
    text: Imam Ibn Ḥazm al-Andalusī
  - role: translator
    text: Dr. Muḥammad Abū Laylā
  - role: editor
    text: Mohammad Khalid Hussain
publisher: Granada Publications
date: 2019
lang: en-GB
description: This is the description.
page-progression-direction: ltr
css: epub3.css
---

# Introduction

In the name of Allāh the Most Merciful and Clement: [O Allāh I implore Your
assistance, O Allāh bless Muḥammad and his family and grant them peace]. Abū
Muḥammad ʿAlī ibn Aḥmad ibn Saʿīd ibn Ḥazm al-Andalūsī (May Allāh be pleased
with him) has said:

1. Praise be to Allāh for His great gifts. May Allāh bless [our master]
Muḥammad, His servant, the seal of His Prophets and Messengers; may He grant
them eternal blessings. I rely on Him for any ability and strength I may have,
and I seek His aid and protection against all the various terrors and ills of
this world. And may He deliver me from all horror and suffering in the next
world.

2. Now, I have gathered together in this book numerous ideas which Allāh, the
provider of intellect, has enabled me to profit from as day succeeded day,
[and year succeeded year] and circumstances altered, permitting me to
understand the vicissitudes of fate and to control its fluctuations, to the
extent that I have devoted the larger part of my life to it. I have chosen to
master these problems by study and contemplation, rather than throw myself
into the various sensual pleasures which attract most souls on this earth, and
rather than amass unnecessary wealth. I have gathered together all my
observations into this book in the hope that the Almighty may allow it to
benefit whichever of His servants He wishes who has access to [is capable of
understanding] my book, in the matters over which I have slaved, devoting all
my efforts to them and reflecting at length upon them. I hope that it will be
well received, and I present it with good intentions and blessings [with a
good heart].

This book will benefit a person more than financial treasures and possessions
of property, if he meditates upon it, and if Allāh enables him to make good
use of it. As for myself, my hope in this enterprise is to win the greatest
reward from Allāh, since my intention is to help His servants, to remedy
whatever is corrupt in their character, and to heal the sickness of their
souls. I beseech the assistance of Allāh [Almighty, we wish only for Allāh,
the best of defenders].

# Treatment of the Souls

3. The pleasure which a prudent man has from his own good sense, a scholar
from his knowledge, a wise man from his wisdom, the pleasure of anyone who
works hard in ways pleasing to Almighty Allāh, is greater than the pleasure
which the gourmet has from his food, a drinking man from his tipple, a lover
from the act of love, a conqueror from his conquest, a reveller from his
amusements [the player from his game] or a commander from giving orders. The
proof of this is that the wise man, the prudent man, the scholar, the
practising Muslim and all those that we have mentioned are capable of enjoying
these pleasures as much as the man who indulges in them. They have the same
feelings and desires as those who hasten to satisfy them. But they have
deliberately refrained and turned away from them, preferring to seek after
moral excellence. None can judge these two [kinds of pleasure] except someone
who has known both; not someone who has known one and not the other.

4. [As things happen one after the other] If you look deeply into worldly
matters you will become melancholy and will end by reflecting upon the
ephemeral nature of everything here below, and the fact that truth lies only
in striving for the hereafter, since every ambition to which you might cling
will end in tears: either the goal is snatched from you, or you have to give
the attempt up before you reach it. One of these two endings is inevitable
except in the search for Allāh the Almighty and Powerful. Then the result is
always joy, both immediate and eternal. The immediate joy is because you stop
worrying about the things which usually worry people; this leads to an
increase in the respect paid to you by friends and enemies alike. The eternal
joy is the joy of Paradise.

5. I have tried to find one goal which everyone would agree to be excellent
and worthy of being striven after. I have found one only: to be free from
anxiety. When I reflected upon it, I realized that not only do all agree in
valuing it and desiring it, but I also perceived that, despite their many
different passions and aspirations and preoccupations and desires, they never
make the slightest gesture unless it is designed to drive anxiety far away.
One man loses his way, another comes close to going wrong, finally another is
successful---but he is a rare man, and success is rare, [O, All-knowing Allāh].
Dispelling anxiety is a goal upon which all nations agree from the time when
the Almighty created the world until the day when this world will pass away
and be followed by the Day of Judgment---and their actions are directed to
this goal alone. In the case of every other objective there will always be
some people who do not desire it.

    For example, some people are not religious and do not take eternity into
    account. There are some who by nature and inclination prefer obscurity to fame
    [the obscurity of satisfied passion]. There are some who have no interest in
    amassing a fortune, preferring abstinence to ownership; this was the case with
    many of the Prophets (Peace be upon them)---and those who followed their
    example, ascetics, and philosophers. There are some who by nature dislike
    sensual pleasures and scorn those who seek after them, such as those men we
    have just mentioned, and who prefer to lose a fortune rather than gain one.
    Some prefer ignorance to knowledge, in fact most of the people that you see in
    the street are like this. These are the objectives of people who have no other
    aim in life. Nobody in the whole world, from the time of its creation until
    its end, would deliberately choose anxiety, and would not desire to drive it
    far away.

6. When I had arrived at this great piece of wisdom, when I had discovered
this amazing secret, when Allāh the Almighty had opened the eyes of my mind
[spirit] to see this great pleasure, I began to search for the way which would
truly enable me to dispel anxiety, that precious goal desired by every kind of
person, whether ignorant or scholarly, good or evil. I found it in one place
alone, in the action of turning towards Allāh the Almighty and Powerful, in
pious works performed with an eye to eternity.

7. Thus the only reason that someone chases after riches is to dispel the
anguish of poverty. The only reason that someone seeks fame is to dispel the
anxiety of seeing someone else outdo him. The only reason that someone chases
after pleasures is to dispel the anxiety of missing them. The only reason
someone chases after knowledge is to dispel the anxiety of being ignorant
about something. People enjoy listening to other people's conversation and
gossip only because it dispels the anxiety of being alone and isolated. People
eat, drink, make love, wear clothes, play games, build a shelter, mount a
horse, go for a walk, only in order to avoid the reverse of all these actions
and every other kind of anxiety.

8. In all the actions listed here, anyone who pauses to reflect will see that
anxieties inevitably occur, such as problems which arise in the course of the
action, the impossibility of performing the impossible, the fleeting nature of
any achievements, and the inability to enjoy something because of some
difficulty. There are also bad consequences which arise from every success:
fear of one's rival, attacks by the jealous, theft by covetous, loss to an
enemy, not to mention criticism, sin and such things. On the other hand, I
have found that actions performed with an eye on eternity are free from 
_every kind_ of fault, free from _every stain_, and a true means of dispelling
anxiety. I have found that the man who is striving for eternity may be sorely
tested by bad fortune on his way but does not worry; on the contrary, he is
glad, because the trial to which he is subjected gives rise to hope, which
aids him in his endeavour and sets him the more firmly on the path towards his
true desire. I have found that, when he finds his way blocked by an obstacle,
he does not worry, because it is not his fault, and he did not choose the
actions that he will have to answer for. I have seen such a man be glad, when
others have wished evil upon him, and be glad when he has undergone some trial,
and be glad, always [living] in a permanent state of joy while others are
permanently the opposite. You should therefore understand that there is only
one objective to strive for, it is to dispel anxiety; and only one path leads
to this, and that is the service of the Most High, Allāh. Everything else is
misguided and absurd.

9. Do not use your energy except for a cause more noble than yourself. Such a
cause cannot be found except in Almighty Allāh Himself: to preach the truth,
to defend womanhood, to repel humiliation which your Creator has not imposed
upon you, and to help the oppressed. Anyone who uses his energy for the sake of
the vanities of the world is like someone who exchanges gemstones for gravel.

10. There is no nobility in anyone who lacks faith.

11. The wise man knows that the only fitting price for his soul is a place in
Paradise.

12. Shayṭān sets his traps, under the cover of finding fault with hypocrisy. It
can happen that someone refrains from doing a good deed for fear of being
thought a hypocrite. [If Shayṭān whispers such an idea in your ear, take no
notice; that will frustrate him.]

# The Mind and Repose

Do not listen to what other people say. Listen only to the Words of the
Creator. That is the way to a completely sound mind and to perfect repose.

13. Anyone who believes himself safe from all criticism and reproach is out of
his mind.

14. Anyone who studies deeply and disciplines his soul not to rest until it
has found the truth, even if it is painful at first, will take more pleasure
in criticism than in praise. Indeed, if he hears people praise him, even if it
is well-deserved, he will become proud, and his virtue will be corrupted.

    If he hears people praise him and the praise is undeserved, he will be
    pleased, but wrongly so, and this is a serious fault. On the other hand,
    if he hears people criticise him and it is deserved, he might be led to
    correct the behaviour that led to it. This criticism would be a piece of
    considerable good luck that only a fool would ignore. If someone is
    criticized unjustly and he controls himself, he will gain merit by his
    meekness and patience. Furthermore, all the good works ever done by his
    critic will be credited to him, and he will gain the benefit of them on
    Judgment Day when they will stand him in very good stead when he needs
    them, although they were not a result of his own efforts. And this is a
    supreme piece of good luck which it would be mad to disdain. If he does
    not hear people's praise, what they say or do not say makes no difference
    to him. But it is a different matter with their criticism, he wins either
    way, whether he hears their criticism or not.

15. If it were not for the words of the Prophet (may Allāh be pleased with
him) about “good praise” which “brings to the believers the express good news
of the happiness which has been promised,” it might have been a sign of wisdom
to prefer being criticized even unjustly to being praised with good reason.
But these words were spoken. The promised happiness “will always arise from
merit, not from absence of merit; it will reward only the object of praise,
not merely the fact that praises were uttered.”

16. There is no difference between virtues and vices, between acts
of devotion and acts of rebellion, except in as far as the soul feels
attracted or repelled. Happy the man whose soul finds pleasure in virtue and
good deeds, fleeing vice and rebellion. And unhappy the man whose soul finds
pleasure in vice and rebellion, fleeing virtue and good deeds. This is nothing
less than the sacred order of things ordained by the providence of the
Almighty, Allāh.

17. Anyone who strives after eternity is on the side of the Angels. Anyone who
strives after evil is on the side of the demons. Anyone who seeks fame and
victory is on the side of the tigers. Anyone who seeks sensual pleasures is on
the side of the [dumb] beasts. Anyone who seeks money for its own sake, not
for spending on pious obligations and praiseworthy acts of charity, is too
base, too vile to be compared with a beast. He resembles rather the waters
which gather in caves in inaccessible places: no animal profits at all from
them, [except now and then a bird; then the wind and the sun dry up what is
left. And the same thing happens to possessions which are not consecrated to
pious works].

18. A wise man has no satisfaction in a quality which sets him below tigers,
dumb beasts, and inanimate objects. He rejoices only in his progress in that
virtue by which Allāh distinguishes him from these same tigers, dumb beasts,
and inanimate objects: this is the virtue of intelligence which he shares with
the angels.

19. Anyone who feels proud of courage which is not applied in its normal
directions, i.e. the service of the Almighty Allāh, let him understand that the tiger
is braver than him, that the lion, the wolf, and the elephant are braver than
him.

20. Anyone who glories in his own physical strength, let it be known to him
that the mule, the ox, and the elephant are physically stronger than him.

21. Anyone who glories is his ability to carry heavy weights, let it be known
to him that the donkey can carry greater weights.

22. Anyone who glories in his ability to run, let it be known to him that the
dog and the hare are faster runners than he.

23. Anyone who glories in the sound of his voice, let it be known to him that
many of the birds have sweeter voices than he, and the sound of the flutes is
more exquisite and charming than the sound of his voice. How can anyone take
pride or satisfaction in qualities in which these animals are superior?

24. But a man whose intellect is strong, whose knowledge is extensive, and
whose deeds are good, should rejoice because only the Angels and the best
of men are superior to him in these matters.

25. Allāh says «Anyone who fears the majesty of Allāh, and controls himself
against passion, he shall have Paradise for his refuge.» [Quran 79:40] These words
encapsulate all virtue: _to control oneself against passion_ means in fact to
turn away from one's natural tendency towards anger and lust, things which are
both under the dictates of passion. Then all that is left for the soul to use
is the intellect which Allāh has given it, the good sense which distinguishes
it from the beasts, from insects or vermin, and from tigers.

26. “Never lose your temper,” as Allāh's Prophet (Peace be upon him) said to a
man asking advice, and, as he also said commanding him, “Do as you would be
done by,” together encapsulate the whole of virtue. Indeed, the fact that the
Prophet forbade all anger implies that although the soul has been given the
ability to be angry, it should refrain from this passion, and the [Prophet's]
commandment to do as you would be done implies that the souls should turn away
from the strong force of greed and lust and should uphold the authority or the
means of justice which springs from the rationality which is part of the
reasonable soul.

27. I have seen the majority of people---except those who Allāh Almighty has
protected, and they are few---throw themselves into the miseries, the worries,
and fatigues of this world, and pile up a mountain of sin which will mean that
they enter hellfire in the Hereafter and will have no advantage from the
perfidious[^mean-perfidious] intentions which they nurse so carefully, such as wishing for an
inflation of prices which would bring disaster upon the children, the
innocent, or wishing the worst trials upon those they hate. They know very
well that these bad intentions will not necessarily bring about what they
desire or guarantee its advent, and if they clarified and improved their
intentions they would hasten the repose of their spirits. They would then have
the time to devote themselves to their own business and would thus profit a
great deal in addition to the return of their souls to Allāh, and all this
without having at all hastened or delayed the realization of their desires. Is
there any worse deception than the attitude which we warn against here, and is
there any greater happiness than the one which we are promoting?

[^mean-perfidious]: _perfidious_: ...deliberately faithless; basely
treacherous.

28. When we contemplate the duration of this Universe, we see it limited to
the present moment, which is nothing but the point which separates two
infinities of time. The past and the future are as meaningless as if they did
not exist. Is anyone more misguided than the man who barters an eternal future
for a moment which passes quicker than the blink of an eye?

29. When a man is asleep, he leaves the world and forgets all joy and all
sorrow. If he kept his spirit in the same state on waking, he would know
perfect happiness.

30. A man who harms his family and his neighbors is viler than them. Anyone
who returns evil for evil is as bad as them. Anyone who refrains from
returning evil is their master, their superior, and the most virtuous among
them.

# Knowledge

31. If knowledge had no other merit than to make the ignorant fear and respect
you, and the scholars love and honour you, this would be good enough reason to
seek after it. Let alone all its other merits in this world and the next!

32. If ignorance had no other fault than to make the ignorant man jealous of
knowledgeable men and jubilant at seeing more people like himself, this by
itself would be a reason enough to oblige us to flee it. Let alone the other
bad results of this evil in this world and the next!

33. If knowledge and the action of devoting oneself to it had no purpose
except to free the man who seeks it from the exhausting anxieties and many
worries which afflict the mind, that alone would certainly be enough to drive
us to seek knowledge. But what should we say of the other benefits too
numerous to list, the least of which are the above-mentioned, and all of which
accrue to the knowledgeable man. In search of benefits as small as these, the
petty kings have worn themselves out in seeking distraction from their
anxieties in game of chess, dicing, wine, song, hunting expeditions, and other
pastimes which bring nothing but harm in this world and the next and
absolutely no benefit.

34. If the scholar who has spent long peaceful hours [at his studies] stopped
to think how his knowledge has protected him against humiliation at the hands
of the ignorant, and against anxiety about unknown truths, and what joy it has
brought him by enabling him to solve problems which others find insoluble, he
would certainly increase his expressions of gratitude to Allāh and rejoice
more in the knowledge that he has and desire even more to add to it.

35. Anyone who spends his time studying something inferior, abandoning higher
studies of which he is capable, is like someone who sows corn in a field
capable of growing wheat, or who plants bushes in soil which could support
palm trees and olives.

36. To spread knowledge among those incapable of understanding it would be as
harmful as giving honey and sugary confections to someone with a fever, or
giving musk and amber to someone with a migraine caused by an excess of bile.

37. A man who is a miser with his knowledge is worse than a man who is a miser
with his money, for the latter is afraid of using up what he possesses but the
former is being mean with something which does not get used up and is not lost
when it is given away.

38. Anyone who has a natural inclination towards a branch of knowledge, even
if it is inferior to other branches, should not abandon it, or he would be
like someone who plants coconuts in al-Andalus or olive trees in India where
neither would produce fruit.

39. The most noble branches of knowledge are those which bring you close to
the Creator and help you to be pleasing to Him.

40. When you compare yourself with others in matters of wealth, position, and
health, you should look at people less favored than yourself. When you
compare yourself with others in matters of religion, knowledge, and virtue,
look at people who are better than yourself.

41. The mysterious branches of knowledge are like a strong drug which benefits
a strong body but damages a weak one. In the same way, the esoteric branches
of knowledge enrich a strong mind, and refine it, purifying it of its flaws,
but destroy a weak mind.

42. If a madman threw himself as deeply into good sense as he throws himself
as deeply into madness, he would surely be wiser than al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī[^basri],
Plato of Athens[^plato], and Vuzurgmihr the Persian.[^vuzurgmihr]

43. Intelligence has its limits; it is useless unless it is based upon the
guidance of religion or on good fortune in this world.

44. Do not harm your soul by experimenting with corrupt views in order to
demonstrate their corruption to someone who has consulted you, otherwise you
will lose your soul. If you shield yourself from acting in a detestable way,
any criticism that can be thrown at you by a man of corrupt beliefs because
you disagree with him is better than his respect and better than the bad
effect on both of you if you committed these detestable acts.

45. Guard against taking pleasure in any way that will harm your soul and is
not required of you by the religious law nor by virtue.

46. Knowledge no longer exists if one has ignored the attributes of the
Almighty Great Creator.

47. There is no worse calamity for knowledge and for scholars than when
outsiders intrude. They are ignorant and think they are knowledgeable; they
ruin everything and believe that they are helping.

48. Anyone who is seeking happiness in the Hereafter, wisdom in this world,
the best way to behave, the sum of all moral qualities, and the practice of
all the virtues, should take as his model Muḥammad, the Prophet of Allāh
(Peace be upon him) and emulate as far as possible the Prophet's morals and
behaviour. May Allāh help us to take him as an example, by His grace, amīn
[amīn]!

49. The ignorant have annoyed me on two occasions in my lifetime. First, when
they spoke of things they did not know, at a time when I was equally ignorant;
the second time when they kept silent in my presence [in the days when I had
learnt something]. In the same way they were always silent about matters which
would have benefited them to speak about, and spoke about matters which
brought them no benefit.

50. Scholars have brought me pleasure on two occasions in my lifetime: first,
they taught me when I was ignorant; the second time was when they conversed
with me after I had been taught.

51. One of the merits of religious knowledge and asceticism in this world is
that Almighty Allāh does not put it within the reach of anyone except those
who are worthy of it and deserve it. One of the disadvantages of the great
things of this world, wealth and fame, is that they are mostly given to people
who are unworthy of them and do not deserve them.

52. Anyone who is seeking after virtue should keep company with the virtuous
and should take no companion with him on his way except the noblest friend,
one of those people who is sympathetic, charitable, truthful, sociable,
patient, trustworthy, loyal, magnanimous, pure in conscience, and a true
friend.

53. Anyone who is seeking fame, fortune, and pleasure will keep company only
with those people who resemble mad dogs and sly foxes: they will take for
their travelling companions only people [inimical[^mean-inimical] to his belief] who are
cunning and depraved in nature.

[^mean-inimical]: _inimical_: Adverse or injurious in tendency or influence; harmful, hurtful.

54. The usefulness of the knowledge [of good] in the practice of virtue is
considerable: anyone who knows the beauty of virtue will practise it, though
it may be rarely. Knowing the ugliness of vice, he will avoid it, though it
may be rarely. The man with knowledge of good will listen to soundly-based
praise and desire it for himself. He will listen to talk of evil and desire to
avoid it. From this premise it necessarily follows that knowledge has a part
in every virtue, and ignorance has a part in every vice. A man who has had no
instruction in the knowledge [of good] will not practise virtue unless he has
an extremely pure nature, a virtuous constitution. It is the particular state
of the Prophets (peace and the blessings of Allāh be upon them!) for Allāh has
taught them virtue in its entirety, without them having learnt it from men.

55. It is true that I have seen among the common people some who, by their
excellent behaviour and morals, were not surpassed by any wise man, any
scholarly, self-controlled man. But this is very rare. And I have seen men who
have studied the different branches of knowledge, who have a good knowledge of
the messages of the Prophets (Peace be upon them) and the advice of the
philosophers and who nevertheless surpass the most wicked in their bad
behaviour, their depravity, both internal and external. These are the worst of
all creatures. This is very common and I therefore perceive that these two
[moral attitudes] are a favour which is granted or withheld by Allāh Almighty.

[^basri]: Al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī ([ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 100/718 [ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}) was a great Muslim traditionalist and Ṣūfī ascetic. In the history of Islām he looms large for his literary writings and moral sayings. See Ibn Khallikān, _Wafayāt_ (Cairo, Bulaq) vol.\ 1, p.\ 227. He was born and lived in Basra, southern Iraq.

[^plato]: Plato, the famous Greek philosopher, d.\ 347 [bc]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}, disciple of Socrates, visited Egypt and lived there for one year and learned before Egyptian wise men in ʿAyn Shams. Jamāl al-Dīn Abū al-Ḥasan al-Qafṭī, _Tārikh al-Ḥukamāʾ_, edited by Julius Lippert (Leipzig, 1903) p.\ 16, also Abū Sulaymān al-Manṭiqī al-Sijistānī, _Ṣiwān al-Ḥikmah wa Thalāth Rasāʾil_, edited by A. Badawī, (Tehran, 1974) p.\ 84, 128ff.

[^vuzurgmihr]: Vuzurgmihr was the minister of the ancient Persian king Khusrau Nushirwan, and his son's tutor. He is famous for his wise sayings, which are often quoted in Arabic sources, and he is said to have been the first to translate the Indian text _Kalila wa Dimna_ into the Persian language.

# Morals and Behaviour

56. Take care to have a reputation of being a man of good intention. Beware of
gaining reputation of being devious or people will avoid you more and more and
you will finish by being harmed or even lost.

57. Train yourself to think about the things that frighten you. If they come
to pass, you will not be so worried by them. You will not lose anything by
growing accustomed to the thought of them, and your pleasure will be greater
or even doubled if something nice or unexpected happens.

58. When worries multiply, they will all fall to the ground [A way out will
be found].

59. A deceitful man may occasionally keep his word to a lucky man, and a
faithful man may occasionally betray an unlucky man. Happy is he who in
this world is not obliged by fate to put his friends to the test.

60. Do not worry about a man who wishes you ill. If fortune favours you he is
lost and your luck will protect you. If fortune does not favour you then
anyone can harm you.

61. Blessed is the man who knows his own faults better than others know them.

62. Patience in the face of others' insolence is of three kinds: patience with
someone who has power over you when you have none over him; patience with
someone you have power over when he has none over you; finally patience with
someone when neither of you has power over the other. The first kind is
humiliating and degrading; it is not a virtue. The advice for someone who is
afraid of such an intolerable situation would be to abandon everything and run
away. The second kind is a virtue, it is charitable, it is the true
meekness[^mean-meek] which characterizes virtuous souls. The third sort
consists of two kinds. The insolence may arise from a misunderstanding or from
fear, and the one at fault may realize the ugliness of his act and regret it.
To be patient with him would be a virtue and an obligation; this is true
magnanimity.[^mean-magnanimity] But with a person who overestimates his own
value and is proud and arrogant and feels no regret for his action, to
tolerate this is humiliating, it encourages the wrongdoer in his wrongdoing,
because he will act even more violently and it would be stupid to respond in
the same way. The wisest course of action is to let him know that you could
fight back but that you are refraining from doing so because he is beneath
contempt and unworthy of your attention. No more is necessary. As for the
insolent behaviour of the lower classes, the only remedy is to punish it.

[^mean-meek]: _meek_: ...gentleness of spirit; humility.

[^mean-magnanimity]: _magnanimity_:Nobility of feeling; superiority to petty
resentment or jealousy; generous disregard of injuries.

63. Anyone who mingles with the crowd is never short of worries to pain him,
or sins to regret on the day when he will return to Allāh, or anger to give
him a pain in the liver [heart],[^spleen] or humiliation to make him hang his
head. Then what shall I say about someone who is intimate with people and
always in their company? Solitude is where you will find dignity, repose,
happiness, and security. You should treat company like a fire: warm yourself
but do not fall in ["You may draw near but without going right in"].

[^spleen]: Ibn Ḥazm's text states clearly that he has been told that the spleen is the seat of both good and bad temper. He may have this idea from reading the works of Ibn Qutaybah (d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 276/889 [ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}), who reported it from Wahb bin Munabbih, who in turn ascribed it to the Torah. Allāh created man from the four elements water, earth, fire, and air; wet, dry, hot, and cold. Allāh then gave him a mind in his head, covetousness in his kidneys, anger is his liver, determination in his heart, fear and terror in his lungs, emotions, laughter, and tears in his spleen, his happiness and sadness in his face, and in the human body he made 360 joints. This is a medical matter which may be true but it is for doctors to say. See Abū Muḥammad ʿAbd Allāh bin Muslim bin Qutaybah, _ʿUyūn al-Akhbār_, (Cairo, al-Muʾassasah al-Miṣrīyyah al-ʿAmmāh li al-Taʾlīf, n.d.) vol.\ 2, p.\ 62.

    ʿIyāḍ bin Khalīfah said that, during the battle of Ṣiffīn, he heard ʿAlī (May Allāh be pleased with him) say, “Indeed, the intellect is in the heart, mercy in the liver, pity in the spleen, and the soul/self in the lungs.” (Reported by al-Bukhārī in _al-Adab al-Mufrad_, ḥadīth no.\ 547. Shaykh al-Albānī declared it _ḥasan_. See the recension of _al-Adab al-Mufrad_ by Muḥammad Fuʾād ʿAbd al-Bāqī. [Beirut: Dār al-Bashāʾir al-Islāmīyyah, 1989]).

64. If the company of the people had only two following faults, that would be
enough to keep us away: the first is letting out vital secrets during a
friendly meeting, secrets which otherwise would never have been revealed. The
second is showing off, putting our immortality[^mean-immortality] in mortal
peril. There is no other escape from these two trials than to withdraw into
absolute solitude, far from people altogether.

[^mean-immortality]: _immortality_:The condition of being celebrated through
all time; enduring fame or remembrance.

65. Do not put off to tomorrow what you can do today. If you recognize this
obligation you will make haste to do today even very small preparations for
tomorrow, for if a small number of tasks are left to mount up they become a
great number. In fact they have become too many to do and the whole enterprise
will be wrecked.

66. Do not despise any of the actions that you hope to see counted in your
favour on the Day of Resurrection. By doing them now, even in small measure,
these actions will eventually outweigh the number of your sins which would
otherwise add up to sufficient reason to throw you into hellfire.

67. With depression, poverty, misfortune, and fear, the pain is only felt by
the sufferer. People looking at them from the outside have no idea what they
are like. On the other hand, with false judgment, shame, and sin, only the
onlooker sees how horrible they are! The person who is sunk deep in them does
not perceive this.

68. Security, health, and wealth are only appreciated by a person who does not
have them. Anyone who has them does not appreciate them. On the other hand, a
sound judgment and virtue and working towards eternity, their value is known only
to those who share in them. Anyone who has no share in them has no knowledge
of what they are like.

69. The first person to break with a deceiver is the one whom the deceiver had
deceived. The first person to detest a false witness is the person whom the
false witness supported. The first person to despise an adulterous woman is
the man who caused her to commit adultery.

70. As far as we know, nothing can be degraded and then resume its natural
state without great trouble and difficulty. What can we say about the man
whose head is poisoned by intoxication every night? Indeed, a mind which
drives its master towards its own deprivation every night must be a mind
condemned.

71. The highway [or a long journey] is fatiguing, a quiet retreat is
restorative. Too much wealth makes for greed. A small fortune makes for
contentment.

72. The plans of an intelligent man may go wrong. The plans of a stupid man
never go right.

73. Nothing is more harmful to a governor than to be surrounded by a great
number of unemployed people. A prudent ruler knows how to keep them busy
without being unfair to them, otherwise they will overwhelm him with petty
matters.

    Anyone who invites his enemies to come closer to him is suicidal.

74. Anyone who sees an important person too often regards him as less eminent
and less important.

75. Parading, putting on, for example, a severe and discontented air, this is
the veil with which ignorant people who have risen in the world try to cover
their ignorance.

76. A wise man should not delude himself about friendship which started when
he was in power, because everyone was his friend then.

77. The best person to help you in your affairs is someone with equal interest
in their success. Do not get anyone to help you who would be just as well off
elsewhere.

78. Do not respond to talk which is brought by someone on the part of a third
person, unless you are sure that the latter did say it, because the one who
brought lies to you will go away carrying the truth [the unpleasant truth
which you will have told him and which he will hawk around].

79. Put your trust in a pious man, even if the religion that he practises is a
different one from your own. Do not put your trust in anyone who scorns sacred
things, even if he claims to belong to your own religion. As for a man who
defies the commandments of the Almighty, do not ever trust him with anything
you care greatly about.

80. I have noticed that people are more generous with their opinions than with
their pennies. In my long study of this matter, this has never been disproved
despite countless observations. Since I cannot understand the cause of
this, I suppose it must be innate in human nature.

81. It is the height of injustice to deny a habitual wrongdoer the
opportunity of doing an occasional good deed.

82. When you get rid of one enemy you see a great many others advancing.

83. I have never seen anything more lifelike than the shadow-theatre with its
little actors mounted on wooden handles that are turned rapidly so that some
disappear and others appear.[^puppet]

[^puppet]: This is an important historical reference to shadow-theatres in al-Andalus in the time of Ibn Ḥazm. c.f. Ibn Ḥazm, _al-Fiṣal_, vol.\ 1, p.\ 110 and vol.\ 5, p.\ 6.

84. For a long time I have been thinking about death. I had certain dear
friends, as closely bound to me by the bonds of sincere affection as the soul
is bound to the body. After they died, some of them appeared to me in dreams.
Others did not. While one of the latter was alive, we had each promised to
visit the other in a dream after we had died, if at all possible. But I have
not seen him at all since he preceded me into the other world. I do not know
whether he has forgotten or been engaged.

85. The oblivion of the soul who forgets the state it was in in the world of
temptation [its first abode] while waiting for the resurrection of the body
[to enter the body] is like the oblivion of someone who has fallen into mud
and has sunk [all his promises] together with everything which he knew before
and which was familiar to him. I have also reflected for a long time about
this matter, and it seems to be that there is another possible explanation in
addition to the one just mentioned. I have studied a sleeping person at the
moment when his soul leaves his body, and his senses sharpen to the point of
being able to see the unseen; the soul forgets completely, absolutely, the
state which it was in just a moment before falling asleep, although it was so
recent.

    The soul knows other states in which it is endowed with memory and
    feelings, it can be pleased, it can be hurt. The joys of sleep are felt even
    during the sleep, for the sleeper feels happy, he dreams, he is afraid, he is
    sad even in his sleep.

86. The soul is not happy except in the company of a soul. The body is heavy
and wearying. This is proved by the haste with which one buries the body of a
loved one when the soul has departed from it, and by the sorrow caused by the
disappearance of the soul although the corpse is still there.

87. I have never seen Shayṭān use a worse trick, or an uglier or a more
foolish one, than when he puts two phrases onto the tongues of those who
follow him. The first is when someone excuses his own evil deed by alleging
that someone has done the same to him. The second is when someone makes light
of doing evil today because he did evil yesterday, or he does wrong in one
sense because he has already done it in another. These two phrases excuse and
facilitate evil-doing; they bring it into the arena of what is acceptable,
tolerable and not to be criticized.

88. Be mistrustful if you are able to be sufficiently careful and cautious,
but if you cannot check on them, you will have to trust people. This will bring
you peace of mind.

89. The definition of generosity, the supreme objective of generosity, is to
give away the entire surplus of your possessions in charitable works. The best
charitable work is to bring relief to a neighbour in need, a poor relative,
and a man who has lost his own possessions and is close to ruin. Anyone who
holds on to this superfluous money without spending it in one of these ways is
an example of miserliness. And he should be praised and criticized in
proportion to whether he is more or less generous in this way. Anything given
to causes which are not these charitable ones is squandered, and the action is
blameworthy. It is virtuous to give to someone in greater need part of what
you need to keep alive; this is a nobler act of self sacrifice than plain
generosity is. To keep what you need is neither praiseworthy nor blameworthy
but simply fair. To carry out one's obligations is a duty; to give away
surplus food is generosity. To forget yourself and to give away food as long
as you will not starve yourself is a virtue. To hinder anyone against
performing his duty is against the Law. To refuse to give away the leftovers
of our food is greedy and extremely miserly. To refuse to deprive yourself in
order to give away part of your food which you need is excusable. To deprive
yourself of food, and to deprive your family to any extent, is ignoble, vile,
and criminal. To be generous with property which you have acquired by unfair
means is to aggravate the evil already committed, and it should be rewarded
with criticism, not praise, since you are in fact giving away someone else's
property, not your own. To give people their rightful part of your possessions
is not generosity; it is a duty.

90. The definition of courage is to fight to the death in defense of religion,
in defense of womanhood, of ill treated neighbours, of the oppressed who seek
protection, or in defense of a lost fortune, honour which has been attacked,
and other rights, against all adversaries, whether they be few or many. To do
less than this would be cowardliness and weakness. To use up one's courage in
fighting for the vanities of the world would be stupid recklessness. But it is
even more stupid to devote your courage to fighting against right and duty,
either in your own interest or for others. And even more stupid than all
these, there are men whom I have seen who do not know to what cause to devote
themselves; sometimes they fight Zayd on ʿAmr's account, and sometimes they
fight ʿAmr on Zayd's account, sometimes both in the same day, exposing
themselves needlessly to danger, hurtling towards hellfire, or running towards
dishonour. About such people the Messenger of Allāh (Peace be upon him) has
warned: “There will come a time for men, when the one who kills will not know
why he has killed, and his victim will not know why he was killed.”

91. The definition of continence is to turn away one's glance and all one's
organs of sense from forbidden objects. Everything other than this is
debauchery. Anyone who goes further, and forbids himself what the Almighty has
made lawful, is weak and powerless.

92. The definition of justice is to give spontaneously what is due and to know
how to take what is your right. The definition of injustice is to take one's
due and not give others their due. The definition of nobility of soul is to
give spontaneously and with a good heart what is due to others, and to allow
them their rights willingly; this is also virtue. All generosity is noble and
virtuous, but not every noble act and every virtue is generous. Virtue is a
more general term; generosity is more specific. Magnanimity is a virtue
without being generosity. Virtue is a general prescription to which one adds a
specific action.

93. One hour of neglect can undo a year of pious effort.

94. In the course of affairs, a mistake made by an individual is better than a
just policy followed by the whole assembly of Muslims if they are not grouped
under the leadership of one man. This is because the individual's mistake can
be put right, but the correct views of the Muslim assembly will lead them to
ignore something that may have been wrong, and they will be lost because of
it.

95. In times of civil war, the blossom does not set fruit.

96. I myself had faults, and I tried continually to correct them, by
discipline, by studying the words of the Prophets (Peace be upon them) and
also the words of the most virtuous sages among the ancients who are more
advanced in morality and self-discipline, until Allāh helped me overcome most of
my faults, thanks to His guidance and grace.

    It is an act of perfect virtue, of self-discipline, a sign that one controls
    the truth, to confess such faults in order that one day someone may learn from
    them, if Allāh wills.

97. One of my faults was that I tended to an extreme of self-satisfaction when
I was in the right and an extreme bad temper when I was in the wrong. Ever
seeking to cure myself of this, I decided that I would never again display any
irritations in my remarks, my actions, or my discussions. I renounced every
kind of triumph that is not permitted, and I suffered under the heavy burden
of this decision. I had enough patience to bear a dreadful affliction which
nearly made me sick and an invalid. But I was not capable of overcoming my
passion to always be in the right. It almost seemed that I did not really
think this a fault, that I did not really think I should give up this
attitude.

98. Another fault I had was an ungovernable propensity for sarcasm. What I
decided to do about this was to refrain from anything that might irritate the
person I was talking to. But I did allow myself to crack jokes, feeling that
not to do so would have been narrow-minded and almost arrogant.

99. Another fault: extreme pride. My mind wrangled with my soul, knowing my
defects, and argued so long and so successfully that my pride vanished
completely, leaving no trace, thanks be to Allāh. Moreover, I set myself to
despise myself absolutely and to be a model of humility.

100. Another of my defects was that I suffered from trembling caused by my
youthfulness and the weakness of my limbs. I forced myself to make it stop,
and it disappeared.

101. Another fault: a love of great fame and glory. To deal with this defect,
I decided to renounce everything which is forbidden by religion, Allāh helping
with the rest, because if the soul remains under the control of reason even its
irritability can become a virtue and be regarded as a praiseworthy
disposition.

102. I used to feel extreme repugnance for the company of women on any
occasion, and this made me difficult to get on with. I seem to have been
struggling forever against this immoderate feeling, which I know to be bad
from the problems it has caused me. Allāh help me.

103. I had two faults which the Almighty has kept private and helped me to
fight and overcome by His goodness. One has completely disappeared, all praise
to Him for this. In this case, good luck seems to have been on my side: as
soon as this fault rears its head I hasten to stifle it. But the other fault
has tormented me for a long time. When its waves came sweeping over me, my
veins would throb and this fault would be on the point of reappearing; but
Allāh has allowed me to hold back by one of the manifestations of His goodness
and it has now disappeared.

104. I used to persist in bearing extreme grudges; I have been enabled to
conceal and hide this with the help of the Almighty and to avoid the
manifestation of all its effects. But I have never been able to stamp it out
completely, nor have I ever found it possible to make friends with anyone who
has acted in a truly hostile way towards me.

105. Mistrust itself is regarded by some as an absolute fault. This is not so,
unless it leads the person who feels it to commit deeds not allowed by
religion, or to adopt behaviour which is unsocial. In other cases mistrust can
be steadfastness, and steadfastness is a virtue.

106. As for the reproach made to me by ignorant adversaries who say that I put
no value on anyone who disagrees with me when I believe that I am in the
right, and that I would never act in concert with the ones I contradict even
if they amounted to the entire human population on the face of the earth, and
that I place no value on conforming with the people of my country in many of
the customs or costume which they have adopted for no particular reason---
this independence is a quality which I regard as one of my most important
virtues. There is nothing equal to it, and, upon my life, if I did not possess
it (Allāh forbid), it would be this that I most longed for, and hoped for, and
prayed for to Allāh Almighty. In fact, my advice to all who may hear my words is
to behave in the same way. There is no benefit to be had from copying other
people if their actions are vain and pointless. By doing so one annoys the
Almighty, and disappoints one's mind [deludes oneself], causes suffering to
one's soul and body, and takes upon one's shoulders an unnecessary yoke.

107. A man who knows nothing of the truth has reproached me for not caring
about wrongs done to me, or even wrongs done to my friends, so that I do not
even get annoyed if they are wronged in my presence.

108. My reply would be that anyone who has described me like that was speaking
too hastily and needs to be more precise. When one speaks hastily one slips
into using language that makes the bad not so bad and the good not so good:
for example, “So-and-so is sleeping with his sister,” would be an abominable
thing to say and would horrify everyone who heard it, but if you explained
that it is a matter of “his sister in Islām,” it would be clear that it was
hasty speaking that created the indecent and ugly aspect of the matter.

109. For myself, if I pretended not to feel hurt when I am attacked by
someone, I should not be telling the truth, for it is natural to feel hurt in
such a case, it is only human. But I have forced myself to show neither anger
nor bad temper nor fury. I manage to hold back an angry answer by preparing
myself in advance, then I do so, thanks to the strength and power of Almighty
Allāh. But if I have no time to prepare myself, I restrict myself to retaliating
with cutting phrases, but not insults, and I attempt to say only what is true,
and to express myself without anger or cruelty. I detest doing even this,
except when it is absolutely necessary, for example when I wish to stop the
spread of a false rumour, for most people love to pass on, to anyone who will
listen, hateful tidbits of gossip (which they attribute to a third person),
and nothing will stop them so effectively as this course of action. It stops
them touting around calumnies which they attribute to others, and which serve
no purpose except to corrupt consciences and to spread slander only.

110. Furthermore, as for the man who is wronging me, there are two
possibilities and two only. Either he is lying or telling the truth. If he is
lying, then Allāh will surely make haste to allow me to refute him by his own
tongue, for this man will go the way of all liars and will draw attention to
my merit by falsely imputing bad things to me---for, sooner or later, this
will become clear to most of those who listen to him. If he is telling the
truth, there are three possibilities and only one can be true. Perhaps I had
been his associate in some business and had confided in him as one does with
someone one relies on and trusts, and he would then be the most despicable
sneak: I hardly need say more about such base villainy. Or, perhaps he may be
criticizing in me something which he regards as a fault and which in fact is
not. His ignorance is enough to make this oblivious; it is he who should be
accused, and not the one who he has criticized. Or, finally, he may be
accusing me of a fault which I really do have. Having perceived one of my
faults, he has let his tongue wag about it. If he is telling the truth, I
deserve more blame than he does. In that case, I should be angry with myself,
not with my critic, who is justified in his criticism.

111. As for my friends, I have not forbidden myself to defend them. But I do
it gently, contenting myself with persuading the person who has slandered them
in my presence to repent, urging him to reproach himself, to apologize, to
feel ashamed, to take back what he said. I achieve this by following the
method which consists of blaming the slanderers and telling them that it would
be better to mind their own business and put their own houses in order rather
than track down the faults of others; I go to recall the merits of my friend,
reproaching the critic for limiting himself to recalling his faults without
mentioning his virtues, and saying to him, “He would never speak like that
about you. He has a more generous spirit than you, and that is what you would
not accept,” or something similar. As for attacking the speaker, annoying him,
irritating him, making him angry, in this way pushing him to increase the
insults to my friend which I so dislike, this would make me guilty towards my
friend because it would expose him to coarse and repeated insults which would
be spread to the ears of those who had not heard them before and would give
rise to further slander. Perhaps this would make me just as guilty towards
myself, which would not suit my friend, because I should suffer insult and
injury. For myself, I would not want my friend to defend me beyond the limits
I have outlined. If he goes further, to attack him, or even my father, my
mother and his own parents, depending on how insolent and impudent the one who
started it is. They might even come to blows, I should scorn him, because he
had brought this upon me; I certainly would not be grateful to him. On the
contrary I should be extremely cross with him. Allāh help us!

112. A man of prejudice who never stops to think has accused me of squandering
my fortune. This is more hasty talk, which I would explain as follows: I only
squander the portion which it would be against my religion to keep or would
cast aspersion on my honour or would fatigue me. I consider that what I avoid
of these three evils, however small, far outweighs the amount of fortune lost,
even if it amounted to everything that the sun shines on.

113. The best gift that Allāh can give His servant is to endow him with
justice and a love of justice, with truth and a love of truth [equity] above
all else. To stamp out my evil tendencies, to do everything which is good
according to religion and to the world, I have done only what I could. There
is no strength and power except in Allāh Almighty. On the other hand, a
man who has a natural tendency towards injustice and who finds it easy to act
unjustly, a man who has tendency to transgress and enjoys doing it, let him
despair of ever improving or of amending his nature. Let him realize that he
will not succeed, either in religion or in good conduct.

114. As for vanity, envy, falsehood, and treachery, I have absolutely no
experience of them from my nature. It seems that I have no merit for avoiding
them since all my being spurns them. Thanks for this be rendered to Allāh,
Lord of the Worlds.

115. One of the defects of the love of renown is that it cancels out the value
of good deeds, if the man performing them likes them to be spoken of. This
makes him almost impious because he is working for something other than Allāh.
This defect removes all the value from virtues because the man affected by it
is hardly trying at all to do good for the sake of good, but for love of
renown.

116. There is no worse blame than that of a man who praises a quality in you
that you do not have, thereby drawing closer to its absence.

117. There is no better praise than that of a man who reproaches you for a
fault that you do not have, thereby drawing attention to your merit, and he
gives you your revenge on him by exposing himself to rebuttal and the reproach
of having slandered you.

118. If one knew one's imperfections, one would be perfect. Since no creature
is exempt from faults, happy the man whose defects are few and unimportant.

119. The thing that happens most often is something unexpected. Steadfastness
consists of preparing yourself for as much as can be foreseen. Glory be to the
One who has so arranged it in order to show to mankind man's powerlessness and
his need for his Creator Almighty.

# Brothers, Friends, and Advice

120. Anyone who criticizes you cares about your friendship. Anyone who makes
light of your faults cares nothing about you.

121. Criticizing a friend is like melting an ingot:[^mean-ingot] it will either become
refined or it will disappear.

[^mean-ingot]: _ingot_: as _ingot-copper_, _ingot-gad_, _ingot-holder_,
_ingot-mould_, _ingot-silver_, _ingot-steel_, etc. _ingot iron_, iron which
contains too little carbon to temper and is nearly pure by industrial
standards, differing from wrought iron in containing no slag.

122. A friend who conceals a secret which concerns you is more disloyal
towards you than one who tells a secret of yours. For the one who tells your
secret is simply betraying you, but the one who conceals one from you is
betraying you and also mistrusting you.

123. Do not try to be friends with those who scorn you. You will gain nothing
from it but deception and shame.

124. Do not scorn those who try to be friends with you; to do so is a form of
injustice and it would be failing to respond to their kindness, and this is
bad.

125. Anyone who is forced to mix with men should on no account tell his
companion everything that passes through his mind. When he leaves him, he must
always behave as if he were a desperate enemy. When he wakes up each morning
he should always expect his friends to betray him and do evil, expect them to
behave exactly like his sworn enemies. If nothing of the sort happens, he
should praise Allāh; if it does, then at least he will prepared and the shock
will be less. For myself, I tell you I had a friend who had sworn friendship,
sincere pure friendship, for bad times or good, for richer or poorer, in anger
and in satisfaction. This friend changed his attitude towards me, in a most
hateful way, after twelve years of perfect friendship, and for an absolutely
futile reason which I would never have believed could influence such a man. He
has never reconciled with me since, and this has made me very sad for many
years.

    However, one should not do bad things and follow the example of
    wicked men and traitors.

126. On the contrary, we should learn from this example the path that we
should take. It is perilous and difficult to follow and a man would do well to
advance as carefully as the pin-tailed sandgrouse,[^sandgrouse] more
cautiously than the magpie, until he turns off the road trodden by mankind and
makes his way towards his Lord. This road leads to victory, so we are told by
religion and also by the world. The man who follows it will keep the pure
intention of healthy souls who are true to their promises, men without guile
and trickery. He will possess the virtues of the elect, the character of the
virtuous. And, moreover, he will feel as safe as the worst deceivers, as free
from care as the evildoers, as the most wicked and cunning people.

[^sandgrouse]: The pin-tailed sandgrouse is a robust, medium-sized bird about 31--39\ cm (12--15 in.) in length. The general colouring is cryptic, a blend of barred and flecked olive green, brown, buff, yellow, grey, and black. The underparts and the feathered legs are dull white. The nominate race, _Pterocles alchata_, breeds in Iberia and southern France. (Wikipedia)

127. You should keep any secret that is confided to you, and not reveal it to
any friend or stranger, even the man closest to you, if you are at all able to
keep it. You should be true to everyone who trusts you, and do not yourself
trust in anyone in affairs which you want to succeed except when absolutely
necessary, and even then you should stop and think again and make a personal
effort and draw strength from Allāh.

128. Be generous with your superfluous possessions and strength to help
others, whether they ask you or not, and to help anyone who needs you and whom
you are able to help, even if he does not expressly come to you for help.

129. Do not expect any help in return from anyone except Allāh, the Almighty and
Great. As you go on your way always remember that the first person you help
will be the first to do harm and turn against you. Indeed, because of their
profound jealousy, men of bad character detest those that help them when they
see that the latter are better off.

130. [In your social life] treat every human being as graciously as you can.
If someone comes to you with defects and problems such as arise in the normal
course of life, do not let them know that you do not like them. In this way
you shall live in peace and quiet.

131. When you give advice, do not give it only on condition that it will be
taken. Do not intercede only on the condition that your intercession is
accepted; do not make a gift only on the condition that you will be
recompensed. Do it only in order to practise virtue, and to do what you should
do when giving advice, interceding, and being generous.

132. The definition of friendship: [it is the middle point] between two
extremes. What makes one friend sad makes the other sad too. What makes one
happy makes the other happy too. Any relationship less than this is not
friendship. Anyone who answers to this description is a friend. A man may be
the friend of someone who is not his friend for a man can love someone who
hates him. This is the case above all with fathers and their sons, brother and
brother, husband and wife, and all those in whom friendship has become burning
love. Not every friend is a counsellor although every counsellor, by giving
advice shows himself to be a friend.

133. The definition of advice is that the man giving it feels bad about what
harms his friend, whether the latter feels good or bad about it, and he feels
happy about what is good for him, whether his friend is happy or unhappy about
it. This is the added factor which a counsellor has which goes beyond the
limit of simple friendship.

134. The highest aim of friendship, and there is nothing higher than this, is
to have all things in common, one's own person, one's belongings, without any
constraint, and to prefer one's friend to every other being. If I had not
known Muẓaffar and Mubārak, the two masters of Valencia, I should have thought
that such a sentiment had disappeared in our times. But I have never seen any
two other men draw so deeply on all the joys of friendship, despite events
which would have separated other men.

135. There is no virtue which so much resembles a vice as the faculty of
having many friends and acquaintances. But it is really a perfect virtue, made
up of various qualities, since friends are only gained by tolerance,
generosity, patience, loyalty, signs of affection, shared feelings, and
moderation. It is important to protect one's friends, teach them what one
knows, and to win over them by every kind of praiseworthy action.

    We do not mean mercenaries, or those who follow us in our days of glory.
    They are thieves of the title of friendship, they deceive friendship. You
    think that they are friends but they are not. The proof is that they
    abandon you when fortune abandons you. Nor do we mean those who make
    friends for a particular purpose, nor do we mean drinking companions, not
    those who gang together to commit crimes, or villainy, to attack people's
    honour, to satisfy their unhealthy curiosity, or for any other useless
    objective. These are not friends at all. The proof is that they speak evil
    of each other, and that they disperse as soon as the evil interests which
    brought them together are finished. We only mean to speak of those pure
    friends who unite only in the love of Allāh, either to help each other to
    make some real virtue triumph or to taste the pleasures of the only true
    kind of friendship.

    If one commits the fault of having too many friends, there is the difficulty
    of keeping them all happy, the dangers of associating with them, the duties
    which fall on us when they are subjected to trials (for if you betray them or
    let them down, you will be criticized and blamed; but if on the other hand you
    are true to them, you will harm yourself to the extent that you could lose
    your own life, and this choice is the only one acceptable to the virtuous man
    if he wishes to be true to his friendship); if one thinks of the worries which
    we have from the misfortunes which come upon them or which come upon us
    because of them: death, separation, betrayal of one among them, one will see
    that the joy brought by these friends is outweighed by the painful sadness
    which they cause.

136. There is nothing among the vices which is so like a virtue as the desire
to be praised. Indeed, if someone sings our praises in our presence, we would
be silly to believe it, knowing everything that the Tradition has taught us
about flatterers. However, praise may be useful in encouraging someone to do
fewer bad things and more good things. It may lead the person who hears it to
desire to have a character similar to the one who has been praised. Thus I
feel that rulers of the world met one of those people who spread evil wherever
they go and who are said to have done evil things, and he received him with
praise. He had heard his praises sung everywhere, he said; on every side
people spoke of nothing but his good deeds and his generosity. After this the
criminal could not possibly do wrong!

137. Certain kinds of advice are difficult to distinguish from slander for
anyone who hears a man criticising someone else unjustly or unfairly and
conceals it from the person who is the object of this unjust and wicked
statement, by doing this is so unjust and to be blamed. Moreover, if he breaks
it to him bluntly, he may bring more trouble upon the spiteful critic than the
latter really deserved. This would be unfair to him, for it is not fair to
punish ill-doers beyond the measure of their unjust deed. It is difficult for
anyone except a very intelligent man to cope with this situation.

138. The solution to be adopted by the intelligent man in such a situation is
to protect the victim against the slanderer, and no more, not inform him what
the latter said; this is to prevent him going to the slanderer and getting
into more trouble. As for sly tricks, one should protect the victim, but
nothing more than that.

139. Giving information consists of reporting to someone something one has
heard which in no way harms the person one tells it to, strength is from
Allāh.

140. Advice can be given twice. The first time is prescribed as a religious
duty. The second time is a reminder and a warning. If you repeat the advice a
third time it becomes a remonstrance[^mean-remonstrance] and a reprimand.
After that you have to slap and punch and perhaps try even more serious
methods which may cause harm and damage. Certainly, it is only in questions of
religious practices that it is permissible to repeat advice incessantly,
whether the listener accepts it or gets irritated, whether the advisor suffers
from it or not. When you give advice, give it softly, do not shout it out; use
hints, do not speak openly unless you are advising someone who is determined
not to understand. Then explanations would be essential. Do not give advice
only on condition that it is followed. Otherwise you are a tyrant, not an
adviser; you are demanding obedience, you are not allowing religious feeling
and brotherly spirit their due. Neither reason nor friendship gives you the
right to insist. It is rather the right that a ruler has over his subjects or
a master over his slaves.

[^mean-remonstrance]: From _remonstrate_: To urge strong reasons _against_ a
course of action, to protest _against_; to expostulate _with_ a person, _on_
or _upon_ an action.

141. Do not ask of your friend more than you yourself are prepared to give. To
ask for more is to abuse his friendship. Do not gain except when you will harm
yourself and your behaviour will be detestable.

142. If you find excuses for selfish and greedy men and shut your eyes to
their faults, you are not displaying humanity or virtue. On the contrary, it
is a base and feeble thing to do which encourages them to continue in their
bad attitudes, it applauds and supports them in their wicked actions. Such
indulgence would only be humane when displayed towards the just who are quick
to pardon and to act unselfishly. In that case it is an obligation for a good
man to behave in the same way towards them, above all if they have an urgent
need of such tolerance, and if it is more necessary for them.

143. One might retort, “According to what you say, we should stop being
tolerant, we should stop turning a blind eye when it is a question of our
friends. Friends, enemies, and strangers would all be treated exactly the
same; this cannot be right.” Our reply would be---and may Allāh help us
succeed--- nothing but encouragement towards tolerance and unselfishness.

144. You should turn a blind eye not on [the faults of] the greedy but only on
[those of] a true friend. If you wish to know how you should act in this
matter, how you can keep on the path of truth: if there is a situation where
one of two friends needs to be unselfish for the other's sake, each of two
friends should examine the problem and see which of them is in the most urgent
need, the most pressing circumstances. Friendship and humanity then impose on
the other the obligation to be unselfish. If he does not, he is greedy, avid,
and deserves no indulgence since he is acting neither like a friend nor like a
brother.

    If the two find themselves in equal need, in equal straits, true friendship
    would require that they race each other to be the more unselfish. If they
    behave like this, they are both friends. If one of them hastens to be
    unselfish and the other does not, and if this is what usually happens, the
    second is not a friend and there is no need to be friendly towards him. But if
    he would hasten to sacrifice himself in other circumstances then this is a
    pair of true friends.

145. If there is someone in need whom you wish to help, whether the initiative
came from him or from you, do no more than he expects of you, not what you
might personally wish to do. If you overstep the mark, you will deserve not
thanks but blame from him and from others, and you will attract hostility, not
friendship.

146. Do not repeat to your friend things that will make him unhappy and which
it would not benefit him to know. That would be the action of a fool. Do not
hide from him anything that would cause him loss not to know. That would be
the action of a wicked person.

147. Do not be pleased if someone praises you for a quality which you do not
have; on the contrary, be very sorry because it will bring to public attention
that you lack them. To sing such praises is to mock and poke fun, and only an
idiot or an imbecile would be pleased. Do not be sorry if someone criticizes
you for a fault that you do not have; on the contrary, you should be pleased
because your merit will be brought to public attention.

148. On the other hand, you should be pleased to possess a praiseworthy
quality, whether anyone actually praises you for it or not, and you should be
sorry to have a blameworthy fault, whether anyone actually criticizes you for
it or not.

149. Anyone who hears bad things said about the wife of his friend must on no
account tell him, particularly if the person who said them was a slanderer or
libeller[^mean-libeller] or notorious gossip, one of those people who try to
draw attention away from their own faults by increasing the number of people
like themselves; this often happens. As a general rule, it is best to stick to
the truth. Now, in this case, you cannot know whether the statements are true
or false, but you do know that it is a grave sin against your religion to hold
such opinions. However, if you perceive that the same thing is being said from
several gossips, not just one, or if you are able to verify that the statement
is well founded, even if you cannot put your friend in a position to observe
what you have observed, then you should tell him everything, privately, and
tactfully. You should say something like “There are many women…” or “Look
after your house, teach your family, avoid this, mind that…” If he takes your
advice and is put on his guard, he will have profited from the chance. If you
notice that he takes no precautions and does not worry about anything, you
must control yourself, not say a word, and remain friends, for the fact that
he has not believed what you have told him does not oblige you to break with
him. But if, having been in a position to observe some definite proof, you are
able to put your friend in a position to see some identical proof, it is your
duty to tell him and to make him face the whole truth. If he changes his
attitude, that is good. But if he will not change his attitude, you should
shun his friendship, because this would be vile man with no virtue and no
noble aspirations.

[^mean-libeller]: _libeller_: One who libels another; one who publishes a
libel or libels. _Libel_: (n.) In popular use: Any false and defamatory
statement in conversation or otherwise. (v.) To make libellous accusations or
statements; to spread defamation.

150. The fact that a man enters a house secretly is proof enough that he means
ill. The same is true of a woman who enters a man's house secretly. It would be
stupid to require further proof. You should run from such a woman or at least
separate. Anyone who kept her with him would be a virtual go-between.

151. Men can be divided into seven categories according to certain traits of
their characters. Some praise you to your face and criticize you behind your
back. This is the characteristic feature of hypocrites and slanderers; it is
common, mostly among men. Others criticize you to your face and behind your
back. This is characteristic of slanderers who are powerful and insolent. Some
men flatter you to your face and behind your back. This is the mark of
flatterers and social climbers. Others again criticize you to your face and
praise you behind your back. This is characteristic of fools and imbeciles.
Virtuous people take care neither to praise nor to criticize you in your
presence. Either they praise you in your absence, or they refrain from
criticizing you. Slanderers who are not hypocrites or ignorant say nothing to
your face and criticize you in your absence. As for those who want a quiet
life, they take care that they neither praise you nor criticize you, whether
you are present or absent. We have seen these different types of individuals
for ourselves, and we have tested the categories and found them to be true.

152. When you give advice, find a private place and speak gently. Do not say
that somebody else has said the criticisms that you address to your companion,
that would be to speak ill. If your phrase your advice bluntly, you will annoy
and discourage. “Speak to him courteously,” the Almighty has said, “And speak
unto him a gentle word.” [Quran 20:44] And the Prophet (Peace be upon him)
said: “Do not discourage him.” If you are advising someone, and you insist on
seeing your advice taken, you are doing wrong since you could be mistaken and
you would be insisting on him accepting your error and rejecting the truth.

153. Everything has its use. Thus, I have profited greatly from mixing with
the ignorant. This has inspired my inward self, it has sparked off my spirit,
it has sharpened my mind, it has driven me to action. It has given rise to
written works of some value. If the ignorant had not roused something deep
within myself, if they had not woken something that lay hatching in me, I
would not have thrown myself into writing these works.

154. Do not blind yourself to a friend by taking a wife from his family; do
not sign a contract with him. We have never known these two acts to result in
anything but rupture, where ignorant people would expect the ties of
friendship to be strengthened. Not so, and the reason is that the two acts
force each party to press his own interests to the advantage of others. When
there is a clash of individual interests, quarrels result, quarrels bring
about an alteration in affections. The firmest alliance is one between two
people who are already related, because the fact that they are already related
forces them to bear the union, even if they are very unhappy, since they are
joined by an unbreakable tie, that of their common origin, which nature
obliges them to defend and protect.

# Different Kinds of Love

155. I have been asked to focus on what there is to say about love, and the
different kinds of love. All the different kinds of love belong to the same
family. Love is characterized by longing for the loved one, horror of
separation, hope of having one's love reciprocated. It has been suggested that
the sentiment varies according to its object. But the object varies only
according to the lover's desires, according to whether they are on the
increase, the decrease, or are vanishing altogether. Thus, love felt for Allāh
Almighty is perfect love; that which unites beings in the quest for the
same ideal, the love of a father, a son, parents, a friend, a sovereign, a
wife, a benefactor, a person in whom one has placed one's hopes, a lover, all
is generally the same, all is love, but there are different species as I have
just listed, differing by the amount of love inspired by what the loved one is
able to give of itself. Thus love can take different forms: we have seen men
die broken-hearted because of their sons exactly as a lover might have his
heart broken by his loved one. We have heard of a man who burnt with such fear
of Allāh, with such love, that he died of it. We know that a man can be as
jealous of them as a lover is of his mistress.

156. The least that the lover can desire of the loved one is to win her
esteem, her attention, and to approach her---not daring to expect more. This is
how far those aspire who love each other for Allāh Almighty.

157. The next stage is when desire grows as time is spent together, in
conversation, and interest is shown by one another. This is the level of
the love of a man towards his prince, his friend, or his own brother.

158. But the height of what a lover may wish from the loved one is to take her
in his arms when he desires her. That is why we see a man who is passionately
fond of his wife trying different positions in making love, and different
places, so as to feel that he possesses her more completely. It is in this
category that we should put caresses and kisses. Some of these desires may
arise in a father towards his child and may drive him to [express them] in
kisses and caresses.

159. Everything that we have just mentioned is uniquely the function of
[extreme] desire. When for some reason, the desire for some object is
suppressed, the soul is driven towards a different object of desire.

160. Thus we find that the man who believes in the possibility of seeing Allāh
Almighty longs for it, has a great yearning for it and will never be satisfied
with anything less since it is that which he desires. On the other hand, a man
who does not believe in it does not aspire to this ecstasy and does not wish
for it, having no desire for it. He is content to bow to divine will and to go
to the mosque. He has no other ambition.

161. We have observed that a man who is legally able to marry his close
relatives is not satisfied with favours which would satisfy someone who is not
permitted to marry them. His love does not stop at the same point as the love
of a man who is forbidden by law to love them. Those, such as Magians and
Jews, who are permitted to marry their own daughters and nieces, do not curb
their love at the same point as a Muslim does. On the contrary, they feel the
same love towards their daughters or to their nieces as a Muslim does to a
woman he will sleep with. One never sees a Muslim desiring his close relatives
in this way, even if they are more beautiful than the sun itself, even if he
is the most debauched and the most amorous of men. And if, very exceptionally,
it should happen, it would be only among the impious, who do not feel the
constraint of the religion, and who allow themselves every lustful thought,
and who find every gate of desire open to them. It cannot be guaranteed that a
Muslim might not love his cousin so excessively that his love became a passion
and overstepped the affection which he bore towards his daughter and niece,
even if the cousin was not so beautiful as they. In fact he might desire
favours from his cousin which he would never expect from his daughter or his
niece. On the other hand, a Christian will treat his cousin with equal
respect, for he is not permitted to desire her. But [unlike a Muslim] he does
not have to restrain himself with anyone who shared a wet nurse with him,
since he may desire her without offending the laws of his religion.

162. We now see the truth of what we said earlier: love in all its
manifestations forms one single generic family, but its species vary according
to the different objects of its desire.

163. Having said this, human nature is the same everywhere but different
customs and religious beliefs have created apparent differences.

164. We do not say that desire has an influence only on love. We would say
that is the cause of all kinds of cares, even those which concern one's
fortune and social position. Thus it may be observed that a man who sees the
death of his neighbour, or of his maternal uncle, his friend, his cousin, his
great-uncle, his nephew, his maternal grandfather or his grandson, having no
claim on their property, does not fret because it has escaped him, however
large and considerable their fortunes might be, because he had no expectation
of them. But as soon as a distant member of his father's family dies, or one
of his remotest clients, he begins to covet their belongings. And with the
coveting comes crowding in anxiety, regret, anger, and great sorrow if some
tiny part of their fortune escapes him.

165. It is the same with one's position in society: a man who belongs to the
lowest social class does not fret if he is not consulted when someone else is
given charge of the affairs of the land. He does not fret if someone else is
promoted or demoted. But as soon as he begins to feel an ambition to better
himself, it provokes so much worry, anxiety, and anger that it could make him
lose his soul, his world, and his position in the hereafter [lose his soul here
and in the hereafter]. Thus covetousness is the cause of all humiliation and
every kind of anxiety. It is a wicked and despicable kind of behaviour.

166. The opposite of covetousness is disinterest. This is a virtuous quality
which combines courage, generosity, justice, and intelligence. A disinterested
man is truly intelligent because he understands the vanity of covetousness and
prefers disinterest. His courage gives birth to a greatness of spirit which
makes him disinterested. His natural generosity stops him fretting about
property which is lost to him. His equitable nature makes him love reserve and
moderation in his desires. Thus disinterest is composed of these four
qualities, just as covetousness, its opposite, is composed of the four opposite
faults, that is, cowardice, greed, injustice, and ignorance.

    Greed is a kind of covetousness which would like to possess everything; it is
    insatiable and ever increasing in its demands. If there were no such thing as
    covetousness, nobody would ever humiliate himself to anybody else. Abū Bakr
    bin Abī al-Fayyāḍ has told me that “ʿUthmān bin Muḥāmis [d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 356/966
    [ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}] inscribed upon the door of his house in Ecija [in Seville],‘O ʿUthmān, do not covet
    anything.’”

## Other Species of this Kind

167. A man made unhappy by the presence of a person he detests is like a man
made unhappy by the absence of the person he loves. There is nothing to choose
between them.

168. When a lover wishes to forget, he is sure to be able to do so. This wish
is always granted.

169. If you treat the person you live with with respect, he will treat you
with respect.

170. The man who is unhappy in love is the one who is racked by a passion for
one whom he can keep locked away and with whom he may be united without
incurring the wrath of Allāh or the criticism of his fellow-men. All is well
when the two lovers agree in loving each other. For love to run its course
freely, it is essential that the two do not feel bored, for that is a bad
feeling which gives rise to hatred. Perfect love would be if destiny forgot
the two lovers while they were enjoying each other. But where could that
happen except in Paradise? Only there can love be sure of shelter, for that is
the home of everlasting stability. Otherwise, in the world, such feelings are
not protected from misfortunes, and we go through life without ever tasting
pleasure to the fullest.

171. When jealousy dies, you may be sure that love has also died.

172. Jealousy is a virtuous feeling which is made of courage and justice;
truly, a just man hates to infringe the sacred rights of others, and hates to
see others infringe his own sacred rights. When courage is inborn in a person,
it gives rise to a grandeur of spirit which abhors injustice.

173. A man whose fortunes I have followed during these times told me once that
he himself had never known jealousy until he was racked by love. Only then did
he feel jealous. This man was corrupt by nature, he was a bad character, but
nevertheless he was perspicacious[^mean-perspicacious] and generous.

[^mean-perspicacious]: _perspicacious_: Of persons, their faculties, etc.: Of
clear or penetrating mental vision or discernment.

174. There are five stages in the growth of love: first is to think someone
pleasant, that is, someone thinks of someone else as being nice or is charmed
by their character. This is part of making friends. Then there is admiration;
that is the desire to be near the person that one admires. Then there is close
friendship when you miss the other one terribly when they are absent. Then
there is amorous affection when you are completely obsessed with the loved
one. In the special vocabulary of love this is called _ʿishq_, “the slavery of
love.” Finally, there is passion, when one can no longer sleep, eat, or think.
This can make you ill to the point of delirium or even death. Beyond this,
there is absolutely no place where love ends.

# Physical Beauty

When I was asked to examine this matter, this is how I responded:

176. Gracefulness consists of delicate features, supple movements, graceful
gestures, a soul in harmony with the form which fate has given it, even where
there is no visible beauty.

177. Allure is beauty of each feature regarded separately. But someone whose
features are beautiful when considered separately can still appear cold and be
without piquantness,[^mean-piquantness] charm, seductiveness, or grace.

[^mean-piquantness]: _piquant_: That acts upon the mind as a piquant sauce, or the like, upon the palate;
that stimulates or excites keen interest or curiosity; pleasantly stimulating
or disquieting.

178. Seductiveness is the aura of the visible parts; it also goes by the name
of elegance and attractiveness.

179. Charm is a certain something which has no other name to explain it. It is
the soul which perceives it, and everyone knows what it is as soon as they see
it. It is like a veil covering the face, a shining light which draws all
hearts to it so that all agree that it is beautiful, even if it is not
accompanied by beautiful features. Anyone who sees it is seduced, charmed,
enslaved, and yet if you looked at each feature separately you would find
nothing special. It might be said that there is a certain unknown something
which you see when you look into the soul. This is the supreme kind of beauty.
However, tastes do differ. Some prefer seductiveness, others prefer
gracefulness. But I have never met anyone who preferred allure as such.

180. We call beauty piquant when there is a combination of some of these
qualities.

# Practical Morality

<!-- This chapter has footnotes (Makki's Edition) -->

181. Fickleness, which is a fault, consists of switching from one way of life
which is forced and senseless, to another way of life which is equally forced
and senseless; from one absurd state to an equally absurd state for no good
reason.

182. But a man who will adopt habits which suit his capabilities and his
needs, and who will reject everything that is of no use to him [will be
drawing on] one of the best sources of good sense and wisdom.

183. The Prophet (Peace be upon him)---the model of all goodness, whose
character was praised by Allāh, in whom Allāh gathered together the most
diverse and perfect virtues, and whom He kept from sin---was in the habit of
visiting the sick, accompanied by his friends. They went to the boundaries of
Madīnah on foot, wearing neither boots nor sandals, hat nor turban. He wore
clothes woven from the hair of wild beasts when he had them, or he might
equally likely be wearing embroidered cloth if he had it, never wearing
anything unnecessary and never forgetting anything necessary, content with
what he had and doing without whatever he did not have. Sometimes he would
ride a fine mule or he would ride a horse bareback or a camel or a donkey,
with a friend riding behind him. Sometimes he ate dates without bread,
sometimes dry bread, sometimes he ate roast lamb, fresh melon, or _ḥalwā_,
taking as much as needed and sharing out the surplus, or leaving what he did
not need and not forcing himself to take more than he needed. He was never
angry when he found himself alone fighting for a cause, and he let nothing
prevent him from anger when it was a question of Allāh, the Almighty.

184. The perseverance which consists of keeping one's word and the
perseverance which is nothing but obstinacy are so alike that they can only be
told apart by someone who knows what different characters are like. The
difference between the two kinds of perseverance is that obstinacy clings to
error. Its actions are the actions of someone who persists in doing what he
has decided upon when he knows that he is wrong, or when he does not know for
sure whether he is right or wrong. Such obstinacy is wrong. The opposite of
obstinacy is fairness. As for the kind of perseverance which consists of
keeping one's word, its actions are the actions of someone who is right, or
who believes himself to be right, not having seen any reason not to believe
this. This quality is worthy of praise, and its opposite is inconstancy. Only
the first of the two kinds of perseverance [obstinacy] is wrong, because it
makes you lose the habit of thinking about a matter once it has been decided,
and you stop wondering whether the decision is right or wrong.

185. Good sense is defined as the practise of obedience to Allāh and the
practice of piety and virtues. This definition implies avoidance of
rebellion and vices. Allāh has stated this clearly more than once in His
book (the Quran), emphasizing that anyone who disobeys Him is acting
unreasonably. Speaking of certain people, the Almighty has said, “They will
say: if we had listened, if we had understood, we would not be among the
damned,” [Quran 67:10] and He has confirmed their words as true by saying, “They
have recognized their own sins, so misfortune be to the damned.” [Quran 67:11]

186. Stupidity is defined as the practice of disobedience to Allāh and the
practice of vices.

187. As for going wild, throwing stones at people, not knowing what one is
saying, that is lunacy and excess of bile.

188. Stupidity is opposite of good sense, as we have shown above; and there is
no middle point between good sense and stupidity unless it is ineptitude.

189. The definition of ineptitude is to work and speak in a way that neither
serves religion nor the world nor a healthy morality. This is neither
disobedience to Allāh nor obedience, it does not bring anybody else to such
acts, it is neither a virtue nor a harmful vice. It consists only of
drivelling[^mean-drivelling] and rambling about doing pointless things.
According to whether these actions are frequent or rare, the person should be
treated as more or less inept. Moreover he may be inept in one matter,
sensible in another, stupid in a third.

[^mean-drivelling]: _drivelling_: Characterized by or given to silly childish
talk or weak action; idiotic.

190. The opposite of madness is the ability to discern and the ability to make
free use of sciences and technical knowledge. It is what the ancients called
the “faculty of reasoning.” There is no middle point between these two
extremes.

191. As for the art of conducting one's affairs and flattering people by means
that might win their good will and save a situation, such as false dealing,
perversion or any other bad practices, and as for the tricks which allow one
to amass a fortune or to increase one's reputation or to achieve glory by
means of a crime or every kind of base behaviour, these are not the works of
good sense. Indeed, even those people who avowed that they had lost their
senses and whose words Allāh confirmed as true when He said that they had lost
their senses, knew very well how to conduct their worldly affairs, build up
their fortunes, flatter their rulers, and protect their own standing. This
characteristic is called astuteness, and the opposite of it is intelligence
and honesty.

192. However if, in order to achieve these same ends, someone acted with
reserve and dignity, this would be firmness. Its opposite is weakness or
wasting.

193. To be serious, to know how to put each word in the right place, to
preserve moderation in the way that you conduct your life, to show courtesy
towards anyone who comes to you, that is called steadiness and is the opposite
of ineptitude.

194. The virtue of keeping one's word is made up of fairness, generosity, and
courage. Because a trustworthy man thinks it is unfair to deceive anyone who
has put his trust in him or anyone who has done him a good deed, he acts with
fairness. Because he wishes to help to repair the injustices of fate as
quickly as possible, he acts with generosity. Because he has decided to bear
without flinching all the likely consequences of his fidelity, he is
courageous.

195. The virtues have four roots which form all virtue. They are: fairness or
justice, intelligence, courage, and generosity.

196. The vices have four roots which are the basis of all faults and which are
the opposite of the constituents of the virtues. They are: unfairness,
ignorance, cowardice, and greed.

197. Honesty and temperance are two kinds of fairness and generosity.

    Here are some lines of my poetry dealing with morals. Abū Muḥammad Alī bin Aḥmad says:

    | The spirit is the foundation
    |        morals build the fortress upon it.
    | If the spirit does not adorn itself with
    |        knowledge, it will surely find itself in distress.
    | An ignorant person is surely blind
    |        and does not see where he is going.
    | If knowledge is not paired with justice,
    |        it is deceitful.
    | If justice is not paired with generosity,
    |        it is oppressive.
    | Generosity depends on courage.
    |        Cowardice is deceitful.
    | Keep yourself in check if you are jealous.
    |        A jealous person has never yet committed adultery.
    | All these virtues are sublimated in piety.
    |        Truth spreads light when it is spoken.
    | It is from the roots of Good that springs vows
    |         [that bring us nearer to Allāh].

    And here some other lines of poetry in my style: 

    | The reins which control all the virtues are
    |        Justice, intelligence, generosity, and strength.
    | The other virtues are composed of these four.
    |        Anyone who possesses them is at the head of his people.
    | Likewise it is in the head that one finds
    |        The qualities of good sense that enable one to resolve all difficulties.

198. Disinterest as a human quality is a virtue which is made up of courage
and generosity. The same is true of patience.

199. Magnanimity is one kind of courage. It does not have an opposite.

200. Moderation is a virtue which is made up of generosity and fairness.

201. Ruthlessness arises from covetousness, and covetousness arises from envy.
Envy arises from desire, and desire arises from injustice, greed, and
ignorance.

202. Ruthlessness gives rise to great vices, such as servility,[^mean-servility] theft, anger,
adultery, murder, passions, and fear of poverty.

[^mean-servility]: _servility_: Mean submissiveness, degradingly obsequious
demeanour, cringing.

203. To beg for something that belongs to someone else stems from a tendency
which is midway between ruthlessness and covetousness.

204. If we make a distinction between ruthlessness and covetousness, it is
only because ruthlessness reveals the covetousness that is hidden in the soul.

205. The art of dealing with people is a quality composed of magnanimity and
patience.

206. Truthfulness is composed of justice and courage.

207. Anyone who comes to you with lies will go away with truths; that is to
say, anyone who repeats to you lies which he attributes to a third person will
make you beside yourself[^mean-yourself] with rage; you will respond to him,
and your response is the truth that he will carry away. Therefore be careful
not to behave like this, and only answer when you are certain about the
provenance[^mean-provenance] of the lies.

[^mean-yourself]: _beside yourself_: In a state of extreme excitement or
agitation. _They were beside themselves with glee._

[^mean-provenance]: _provenance_: The fact of coming from some particular
source or quarter; origin, derivation.

208. There is nothing worse than falsehood. For how do you not regard a vice which
has as one of its varieties disbelief or impiety itself? For all disbelief is
falsehood. Falsehood is the genus and disbelief is one of its species.
Falsehood arises from wickedness, cowardice, and ignorance. Truly, cowardice
debases the soul. A liar has a vile soul which is far away from achieving a
greatness worthy of praise.

209. If we categorize people by the way of their speaking---and, remember, it
is speech that distinguishes mankind from donkeys, dogs, and vermin---we can
divide them into three groups: the first kind do not worry about what they
pass on, they say everything that comes into their heads, without keeping to
the truth or correcting mistakes, and this is the case with the majority of
people. Another group speak in order to defend their own fixed opinions, or to
protest against what they believe to be false, without trying to establish the
truth, merely holding their ground. This is frequently the case, but it is not
so serious as the first group. The third group makes use of language in the
way of Allāh intended and this is more precious than red sulphur.

210. Endless anxiety awaits a man who is goaded[^mean-goad] or irritated by justice.

[^mean-goad]: _goad_: To assail or prick as with a goad; to irritate; to instigate or
impel by some form of mental pain or annoyance; to drive by continued
irritation _into_ or _to_ some desperate action or uncontrolled state of mind.

211. Two kinds of people live a life without care: one kind are extremely
worthy of praise, the other kind are extremely worthy of criticism. The two
kinds are those who care nothing for the pleasures of this world, and those
who care nothing for _ḥayāʾ_, modesty.

212. To distance ourselves from the vanities of the world, it should suffice to
remember that every night every man alive, in his sleep, forgets everything
that worried him during the day, all his fears, all his hopes. He no longer
remembers his children or his parents, glory or obscurity, high social
responsibilities or unemployment, poverty or riches, nor catastrophes. Such a
lesson should be sufficient for a thoughtful person.

213. One of the most marvellous arrangements in Allāh's world is that He has
made the things that are most necessary also the most easily attainable, as can
be seen in the case of water and the thing which is even more necessary (i.e.
air). And the less essential a thing is, the rarer it is, as can be seen in the
case of sapphires and things which are even less useful.

214. With all the worries, a man is like someone walking across a desert.
Every time that he crosses a certain area, he sees other areas opening in
front of him. Likewise, every time that a man gets something done, he finds
other tasks piling up.

215. That man was right who said that the good have a hard time in this world.
But the man who said that the good are at rest was also right. The good do
suffer from all the evil that they see spread over everything, dominating it,
and all the appearances of injustice which rear up between true justice and
themselves. But their calmness comes from [their indifference to] all the
vanities of this world which so worry the rest of mankind.

216. Take care not to agree with a wicked speaker, nor to help your
contemporaries by doing anything which might harm you in this world or the
next---however little---for you will reap nothing but regret, at a time when
regret will not help you at all. The man you helped will not thank you. On the
contrary, he will rejoice at your misfortune, or, at least---you may be
certain---he will be indifferent to the bad results [of your action] and your
sad ending. But guard against contradicting the speaker and opposing your
contemporaries to the extent that you harm yourself in this world or the next,
however little. You will reap only loss, hostility, and enmity. You may even
allow yourself to take sides, and you may suffer considerable trials which
will be of no benefit [to you] whatsoever.

217. If you have to choose between annoying people or annoying the Almighty,
and if there is no way out except either to run away from the right or to run
away from the people, you should choose to annoy the people and run away from
them, but do not annoy your Lord, do not run away from injustice.

218. You should imitate the Prophet (Peace be upon him) when he preached to
the ignorant, the sinful, and the wicked. Anyone who preaches drily[^mean-drily] and
cheerlessly is doing wrong and is not applying the Prophet's method. Such
preaching would usually only drive his audience to persist in their wicked
ways, from obstinacy, anger, and rage against the insolent sermonizer. He would
then have done bad with his talk, not good. But a man who exhorts in a
friendly fashion, with a smile and with gentleness, putting on the appearance
of offering advice and seeming to be speaking of a third person when he
criticises the faults of the one he is speaking to, then his words reach
farther and have more effect. But if they are not well received, he should go
on to exhort or to appeal to the man's sense of shame, but only in private.
And if [his advice] is still not taken, he should speak in the presence of
someone who will make the sinner change. This is the practice which Allāh
ordains when He commands the use of “courteous terms.” The Prophet used not to
address his listeners directly; instead, he would say to them “What are they
thinking of, the people who do such thing?…” Peace be upon him! He praised
gentleness, commended us to be tolerant, and not to argue. He varied his
sermons so as not to be boring. And Allāh has said, “If you are harsh, and
hardhearted, they would have scattered from about you.” [Quran 3:159]
Severity and hardness should not be used except to inflict the punishment
ordained by Allāh. A man who has been given special authority to inflict such
punishment must not be gentle.

[^mean-drily]: _drily_: Without emotion, sympathy, or cordiality, coldly,
frigidly.

219. Something which can also have a good effect in a sermon is to praise, in
the presence of a wrongdoer, somebody who has acted differently. This is an
incitement to behave better. I know no other benefit of the love of praise: a
person who hears another being praised models himself on him. It is for this
reason that we should tell stories of virtue and vice, so that anyone who
hears them may turn away from the wicked deed that he hears others have done
and accomplish the good deeds that he hears that others have done, thus learning
from history.

220. I have considered everything that lives beneath the skies, I have
reflected long upon it, and I have observed that everything that exists,
whether animate or inanimate, has a natural tendency to build itself up by
divesting the other species of their characteristics and investing them with
his own. Thus, a virtuous man hopes that all mankind will become virtuous and
the sinner hopes that all mankind will become sinful. One may observe that
everybody who recalls a past action of their own which they incite others to
imitate says, “I always do such and such”; someone with a doctrine wishes that
everybody would agree with him. This phenomenon can also be seen among the
elements: when some become stronger than others, they change them to their own
substance: you can see how trees are formed, and how plants and trees are
nourished by transforming water and the moisture in the soil to their own
substance. For this may glory be given to Him who created and organized all
things, the is no other Lord but He.

221. One of the most astonishing manifestations of Allāh's power is that
[despite] the great number of creatures that exist, you never see one so alike
another that there is no difference between them. I asked a man who was very
old and had reached his eighties whether he had ever seen in the past any form
that resembled somebody nowadays to the point of being identical. “No,” he
replied, “on the contrary, every form has something distinctive about it.” The
same is true of everything that exists in the world. Whoever makes a study of
various objects and of the bodies they make up, whoever makes a long and
frequent examination of them, knows this, and is able to discern the
differences and to distinguish one object from another thanks to the nuances
which the soul can perceive but words cannot express. Glory then to the
Almighty, the Omniscient, whose power is infinite.

222. A curious thing in this world is to see people allow themselves to be
dominated by perverse hopes which will bring them nothing but trouble in the
short term and anxiety and sin in the long term. For example, one person will
hope for a rise in the price of foodstuffs, a rise which might be fatal for
some people. But, even if one has a certain interest in something happening,
the fact that one hopes for it does not make it happen before its time, and
nothing will happen that Allāh has not decided. If he had wished for the good
and the prosperity of other people, he would have speeded his own reward,
and achieved peace of mind and virtue, without fatiguing himself at all. Be amazed
at the useless corruption of these characters!

# Treatment of Corrupt Character

223. A man who is subject to pride should think of his faults. If he is proud
of his virtues, he should seek out what is mean in his character. And if his
faults are so well hidden from him that he thinks he has none, let him know
that his misfortune will last forever, that he is the worst of men, that he
has the worst faults of all, and is the least perceptive.

224. In the first place, he is weak in mind and ignorant. No fault is worse
then these two, for a wise man is one who sees his own faults, fights against
them, and tries to overcome them. A fool ignores them because he has little
knowledge and discernment and his thoughts are feeble, possibly because he
takes his faults to be good qualities, and there is nothing on earth worse
than this.

225. There are many who boast of having committed adultery, homosexuality
[acts of child abuse], theft, and other sins, and are proud of these stains
and of the aptitudes that they deployed in these shameful acts.

226. Know well that nobody upon earth is free of all faults except the Prophets,
may Allāh bless them.

227. A man who does not see his own faults is a fallen being; he comes to be
so from baseness, turpitude, stupidity and feebleness of intelligence, and
lack of discernment and understanding, to such a point that he is no different
from vile men and it is not possible to drop lower into degradation than he
has. Let him save his soul by seeking out his own faults and turning his
attention to them instead of his pride and the faults of others, the doing of
which harms him neither in this world or the next.

228. I do not know of any benefit to be drawn from hearing about the faults of
other people except that he who hears about them may learn the lesson, avoid
them, and seek to cure himself of them with Allāh's assistance and might.

229. To speak of the faults of others is a serious shame which is absolutely
not acceptable. One should avoid doing it except when one wishes to advise
someone whom one fears to fall into the clutches of the person who is
criticising or when one only wishes to reprimand a boastful person, which
should be done to his face and not behind his back.

<!-- Check the Quran reference in the following paragraph -->

230. Then you should say to the boastful man, “Turn around and look at
yourself. When you have perceived your own faults, you will have found the
cure for your pride. Do not compare yourself with someone who has more faults
than you do so that you find it easy to commit faults and to imitate wicked
people [Do not allow yourself to commit vile things and to imitate wicked
people]. We have already criticized people who imitate good actions slavishly,
what should we say of people who imitate evil actions slavishly? On the
contrary, you should compare yourself with someone who is more virtuous than
you, then your pride will fade away. Then you will be cured of this hateful
disease which gave birth in you to scorn of other people when there are
without a doubt better people than you among them. If you scorn them with no
cause, they will have cause to scorn you, for the Almighty says, [“To condone an
evil is to commit the same evil.”][^not-exist] “The reward of an evil is an
evil like it.” [Quran 42:20] So you will expose yourself to scorn, even to deserved disdain,
and the anger of Allāh and the loss of every trace of virtue that there may
have been in you.

[^not-exist]: Typesetter: This phrase exists in the original hard copy of _In Pursuit of Virtue_ as well. I checked for it in the original Arabic from two sources: (1) _Rasāʾil Ibn Ḥazm_, vol.\ 1, #161, p.\ 387 (Beirut: Al-Muʾassasah al-ʿArabiyyah li al-Dirāsāt wa al-Nashr, 1987) revised by Dr. Iḥsān ʿAbbās and (2) _Kitāb al-Akhlāq wa al-Siyar_, #173, p.\ 157 (Beirut: Dār Ibn Ḥazm, 2000) checked by ʿAbd al-Ḥaq al-Turkmānī. These sources did not have this phrase.

231. If you are proud of your intelligence, remember all the bad thoughts that
come into your mind and the deceitful hopes which assail you, then you will
realize how feeble your intelligence is.

232. If you are proud of your personal ideas remember your mistakes, keep them
in your memory, do not forget them: think of all the times you have believed
yourself right and you have been right and you have been wrong. If you do
this, you will see that in most cases you have been wrong about as often as
right. The score will come out about equal. But it is more likely that your
mistakes will be more numerous because this is the case with every human being
except the Prophets, the peace of Allāh be upon them!

233. If you are proud of your good works, remember your times of rebellion,
your faults, your life in all its aspects. Ah, by Allāh, then you will find that
they outnumber your good works and it will make your good deeds forgotten. So
you should worry about this for a long time and replace your pride with self-
disdain.

234. If you are proud of your knowledge, you should know that it is no credit
to you, it is a pure gift that Allāh has granted you. Do not receive it in a way
that would anger the Almighty because He might wipe it from you by subjecting
you to an illness which would make you forget all that you have learned and
stored in your memory. I have been told that this happened to ʿAbd al-Malik
bin Ṭarīf [d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 400/1009 [ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}],
who was a scholar, intelligent, moderate, exact in his researches, who had been
allotted by fate such a prodigious memory that virtually nothing reached his
ears that had to be said to him twice. Now he undertook a journey by ship and
experienced such a terrible storm at sea that he lost the memory of most of
what he had learnt and suffered considerable upset to his mind. He never recovered
his full intelligence. I myself have been struck by illness. When I got up from
it I had forgotten all my knowledge except for a few ideas of little value.
I did not recover it until several years later.

235. You should also know that there are many people greedy for knowledge, who
devote themselves to reading, to study, and to research but do not reap any
benefit from it. A scholar should realize that it is enough to pursue
knowledge, many others will rank higher than him. Knowledge is truly a gift
from Allāh. So what place is there for pride? One can only feel humble, give
thanks to Allāh Almighty and beg Him to increase His gifts and not to withhold
them.

236. You should also remember that everything that remains hidden from you,
everything that you do not know of the different branches of knowledge, the
aspects that you have specialized in, and that you are proud to have
penetrated [nevertheless, what you do not know] is greater than what you _do_
know. You should therefore replace your pride with scorn and self disdain,
that would be better. Think of those who are more knowledgeable than you---you
will find that there are many of them---and may your spirit be humble in your
own sight.

237. You should also remember that you may be deceived by knowledge, for if
you do not put into practice what you know your knowledge will be a testimony
against you and it would have been better for you if you had never been a
scholar. For you should remember that an ignorant man is wiser than you, he is
in a better position, he is more excusable. May your pride then completely
disappear.

238. Moreover, the knowledge that you are so proud of having penetrated is
perhaps one of the less important branches of knowledge, of no great value,
such as poetry or suchlike. You should then remember the man whose branch of
study is more noble than yours on the scale of this world and the next, and
your soul should become humble in your own sight.

239. If you are proud of your courage, remember those who are more valiant
than you. Then examine what you do with your courage that Allāh has granted you.
If you waste it in rebellion against Allāh, you are a fool for you are losing
your soul by committing acts of no value to it. If you use your courage in
obedience to Allāh, you are spoiling it by your pride. You should also remember
that your courage will fall away as you grow old and if you live so long you
will become dependent, as weak as a baby.

240. It is true that I have never seen less pride than among the brave, and to
my mind that proves the purity, greatness, and majesty of their spirits.

241. If you are vain because you are strong remember those who may rise
against you, your peers, your equals, men who may be perverse, feeble, and
vile. But you should remember that they are equal to you in the strength you
possess even if you would be ashamed to be like them because of their extreme
baseness, ignominy of the souls, their morals, their origins. You should
despise any honours which make you the colleague of such men as I have just
described, even if you owned the whole world and you had no opponent---
something that is far from likely, since no one has ever heard tell of one man
owning the whole inhabited world, even when it was still small and of limited
dimensions compared with the uninhabited areas. And just think how tiny it is
compared with the celestial sphere that surrounds the universe!

242. Remember what was said by Ibn al-Sammāk [Abū al-ʿAbbās Muḥammad ibn
Ṣubayḥ, d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 183/799
[ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}] to al-Rashīd when the latter asked to
be brought a cup of drinking water: “Commander of the faithful, if this drink
were refused you, how much would you offer to get it?”

    “My entire kingdom,” replied al-Rashīd.

    “Commander of the faithful,” Ibn al-Sammāk continued, “if you found that
    you could not pass water (i.e. urine) from you body, how much would you
    sacrifice to able to do so?”

    “My entire kingdom.”

    “O lord of the Believers, how can you boast of a kingdom which is not
    worth as much as a little urine and a few mouthfuls of water?”^[See Ibn
    Khallikān, _Wafayāt_, vol.\ 2, p.\ 296.] Ibn al-Sammāk was right, Allāh grant
    him peace.

243. If you were king of all the Muslims, you should remember that the king of
Sudan, a disreputable black man, an ignorant man who does not cover his
private parts, has a larger kingdom than yours. If you say, “I have taken it
by right,” [no], upon my life, you have not taken it by right if it is a
source of arrogance in you and you do not use your position to bring justice.
You should be ashamed of your position; it is a state of
turpitude[^mean-turpitude], not a state to feel proud of.

[^mean-turpitude]: _turpitude_: Base or shameful character; baseness, vileness; depravity,
wickedness.

244. If you take pride in your wealth, that is the worse degree of pride.
Think of all the vile and debauched men who are richer than you and do not
take pride in something in which they outdo you. You should realize that it is
stupid to take pride in possessions; riches are burdens which bring no benefit
until you dispose of them and spend them according to the law. Wealth is also
ephemeral and fleeing. It can escape, and you can find it again anywhere,
perhaps in someone else's hands, perhaps in the hands of your
enemy.[^plato-words] To take pride in your wealth is stupid, to put your trust
in good fortune is a trap and a weakness.

[^plato-words]: This passage reminds us of Plato's words: “Do not amass gold
and silver because the [future] husbands of your [widowed] wives, who will
gloat over your demise and ridicule you, will inherit it, while the guilty
conscience remains yours alone.” [See _Mukhtār min Kalām al-Ḥukamāʾ al-Arbaʿa
al-Akābir_ in _Dimitri Gutas: Greek Wisdom Literature in Arabic Translation. A
study of the Graeco--Arabic Gnomologia_, (New Haven: American Oriental
Society, 1975) p.\ 129.

245. If you take pride in your beauty, think of the harm it gives rise to,
which we would be ashamed to put into words. You yourself will be ashamed of
it when your beauty disappears with age. But in saying this we have said
enough.

246. If the praises heaped on you by your friends make you vain, think of the
criticism that your enemies direct at you. Then your pride will melt away. And
if you have no enemies than you have no good in you at all, for there is
nothing lower on the scale of values than the man who has no enemies. That
position is reserved for people who have not received from Allāh a single favour
worth envying (Allāh preserve us from being in this position!) If you think that
your faults are slight, imagine someone else looking at them and think what he
would say about them. Then you will feel shame and will know the measure of
your faults, if you have the slightest discernment.

247. If you study the laws that regulate human nature and the development of
different characters according to the mixture of elements rooted in their
souls, you will surely become convinced that you have no merit from your own
virtues, that they are only gifts from the Almighty, which, if He had granted
to another, would have made him just like you, and you will realize that, left
to your own devices, you would collapse and die. You would replace your pride
that you take in your virtues with acts of grace towards the One who gave them
to you, and with the fear of losing them, for even the most admirable
characters can be altered by illness, poverty, fear, anger, or the decrepitude
of old age. Show compassion towards those who lack the gifts that you have
received, and do not risk losing them by seeking to raise yourself above the
One who gave them by claiming merit for yourself or rights in what He has
granted to you, or by thinking that you can dispense with His protection, for
without it you would perish at once and forever.

248. [For example,] I once suffered a severe illness that caused enlargement
of the spleen. I became anguished, peevish, impatient, and touchy, and I
reproached myself for this, not being willing to face the fact that my
character had changed. I was extremely surprised that I had lost my good
characteristics. In this way I had good proof that the spleen is the centre of
good temper, and that when it is diseased bad temper is the result.

249. If you take pride in your ancestry, that is even worse than everything we
have mentioned so far, since it is pride in something that has no real
usefulness for you in this world or the next. Just ask yourself whether your
ancestry protects you against hunger, or dishonour, or whether it does you any
good in the next world.

250. Next, consider those who are equally well descended, or even better,
those who are descended from the Prophets (Peace be upon them) or their
successors, from the virtuous companions of Muḥammad or from scholars; then
remember those who are descended from non-Arab kings, the Khosrau,^[Khosrau or
Chosroes is a designation of the ancient Persian kings in general.] and
Caesars, those who are descended from the Tubbaʿ and the various kings of
Islam. Consider what remains of them and what has survived. Observe those who
boast of their ancestry as you do of yours, and you will that most of them are
as ignoble as dogs. You will find that they are low, extremely vile,
unreliable; you will find that they are adorned with the very worst of
characteristics.

251. Therefore, you should not boast of something in which such people are
your equals or even superior to you. The ancestors which make you so proud may
have been debauched, drunken, licentious, frivolous, and stupid. Circumstances
allowed them to become despots and tyrants; they left an infamous record which
will perpetuate their shame for ever. Their crime is immense and their
repentance shall be immense on the day of the Last Judgment. Since this is the
case, remember that you are taking pride in something that shares in vice,
ignominy, shame, and dishonour; it is not something to be admired.

252. If you are proud of your descent from virtuous ancestors, how empty their
virtue will leave your hands if you yourself are not virtuous! How little
pride your ancestors will have in you in this world and the next if you do no
good! All men are children of Ādam whom Allāh created by His own Hand, giving him
Paradise for a dwelling place and letting His angels bow down before him. But
how little is the advantage they have since all the vices dwell in mankind and
all the wicked impious people in the world are among their number.

253. When the wise men considers that the virtues of his ancestors do not
bring him any closer to his Lord the Almighty and do not win him any favour
which he could not have gained by luck in a competition or by his own virtue,
not by his wealth, what sense is there in taking pride in a descent which is
of no use to him? Someone who feels proud of it, is he not like someone who
feels proud of his neighbour's wealth, or a third person's glory, or another's
horse because it once wore a bridle that had been his property? It is, as
people say, “Like a eunuch who takes pride in his father's potency.”

254. If your pride leads you to boast, you will be doubly guilty, because your
intelligence will have shown that it is incapable of controlling your pride.

255. This would be true if you had a good reason to boast, so imagine what it
is like if you have no good reason. Nuḥ's son, Ibrāhīm's father, and Abū
Lahab, the uncle of the Prophet---May Allāh grant him blessings, as well as to
Nuḥ and Ibrāhīm---these were the closest relations of Allāh's most virtuous
creatures out of all the sons of Ādam. To achieve nobility it would have been
enough to follow in their footsteps. But they drew no benefit from it.

256. Among those who have been born illegitimate, some have risen to the
highest positions in control of the world's affairs, for example Ziyād [bin
Abīh d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 53/672 [ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}] and Abū Muslim al-Khurasānī [d.\ [ah]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"} 129/746 [ce]{style="font-variant:small-caps;"}]. There
have been others who have attained supreme virtue, like those whom we respect
too highly to name them in this context. We come nearer to Allāh if we love them
and model our lives on their glorious achievements.

257. If you take pride in your physical strength, remember that the mule, the
donkey, and the bull are stronger than you, and better suited to carrying
heavy loads. If you feel vain[^mean-vain] about the lightness of your running style,
remember that the dog and hare surpass you in this field. It is extremely
curious that rational beings feel proud of something in which they are
surpassed by dumb animals.

[^mean-vain]: _vain_: Given to or indulging in personal vanity; having an
excessively high opinion of one's own appearance, attainments, qualities,
possessions, etc.; delighting in, or desirous of attracting, the admiration of
others; conceited.

258. You should know that a man who has pride or a feeling of superiority
buried deep in his soul should measure how well he tolerates anxieties,
adversity, pain, toil, or the worries and misfortunes which plague him. If he
realizes that he tolerates them with a bad grace, he should remember that all
those who are subjected to trials, those who are starving and have nothing to
eat for example, all those who suffer patiently, they have more merit than he
does, despite their weaker understanding. However, if he finds that he is
capable of endurance, let him remember that this makes him no more exceptional
that those we have just mentioned; he may be inferior to them, or their equal,
but he is not their superior.

259. Next, let him consider his conduct. Does he act fairly or unfairly when
he makes use of the gifts which Allāh has granted him: money, power, slaves,
health, or fame? If he finds that he has failed in his obligation to feel
grateful towards the Almighty Benefactor, if he finds that he is at the
extreme edge of fairness, bordering on injustice, he should remember that
people who are just and grateful and honest have been more favoured than he
and are more virtuous than he. If he considers that he does love justice let
him remember that a just man is far from being proud because he knows the real
importance of things, the real value of characters, and he loves the happy
medium which is the balance between two bad extremes; on the contrary, he must
incline towards one of these bad extremes.

260. You should remember that if you oppress or maltreat beings whose fate has
been entrusted to you by Allāh as slaves or subjects, this shows that you have
an ignoble soul, a vile spirit, and a weak intelligence. Indeed, a wise man with
his noble spirit, his elevated thoughts, fights only against people as strong
as himself, his peers in potency; but to attack those who cannot defend
themselves is the sign of a vile nature, a depraved soul and character, it
shows you to be incapable and dishonorable. A man who behaved like this would
descend to the level of someone who was pleased to have killed a rat, to have
exterminated a flea, or to have squashed a louse. There is nothing more base or
vile.

261. Remember that it is harder to tame the self than to tame wild beasts. In
fact, when wild beasts are shut inside cages ordered for them by kings, they
cannot harm you. But the self, even if it were put in a prison, could not be
guaranteed to do you no harm.

262. Pride is like a tree trunk; its branches are complacency,
presumptuousness,[^mean-presumptuousness] haughtiness,[^mean-haughtiness]
arrogance, and superiority. These terms refer to concepts that are very
similar to each other and hard for most people to tell apart. A proud man
becomes proud because of an obvious merit: one man may be vain about his own
scholarship and be haughty and scornful towards others, another may be vain
about his deeds and believe himself to be eminent and superior. One man is
proud of his own judgment and becomes arrogant; another is self-satisfied and
becomes complacent. Another, full of his own reputation and high standing,
becomes self-important and haughty.

[^mean-presumptuousness]: _presumptuousness_: Characterized by presumption in opinion or conduct;
unduly confident or bold; arrogant, presuming; forward, impertinent.

[^mean-haughtiness]: _haughtiness_: High in one's own estimation; lofty and
disdainful in feeling or demeanour; proud, arrogant, supercilious. (Of
persons, their action, speech, etc.)

263. The lowest degree of pride is when you refrain from laughing when
laughter is not out of place; you avoid quick movements and responses except
when it is unavoidable in daily life. However, such a fault is very serious.
To behave in this way in order to get on with one's work and to avoid
time-wasting nonsense would even be a praiseworthy virtue. But these people
only behave like this out of disdain for others and from pride in themselves,
and so they deserve only blame, for deeds are of value according to the
intentions of the doer, and every being shall be rewarded according to what he
intended to do.^[This is a part of a ḥadīth reported by ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb
and related by al-Bukhārī and Muslim.]

264. Next, a more serious case is when you are not clever enough to keep pride
within its rightful limits, when your spirit is too weak, and you reach the
point of showing disdain and scorn towards other people by your words and
deeds. Then, going even further, when your sense and your spirit are even
weaker, you reach the point of desiring to harm people with words and with
blows, to give them orders, to commit abuses, to tyrannise them, to exact where
possible, obedience and submission from them. When he is unable to do this,
the proud man sings his own praises and contents himself with criticizing
other people and mocking them.

<!-- TODO check the following paragraph -->

265. Pride can also exist for no good reason and where there is no merit in
the proud person; this is the strangest thing about it. The popular phrase for
it is “_Mutamandil_ discernment.” It is often found in women or in men whose
spirit is rather effeminate. It is the pride of someone who has absolutely no
good quality: neither knowledge, nor courage, nor high social standing, nor
noble descent, nor fortune, which might give him abusive authority.

    And, what is more, such a man knows that he is a non-entity in every way, for
    even the idiot that has stones thrown at him knows this. The only person who
    can deceive himself is one who has a small part of some good qualities. For
    example, a man who is endowed with a little brain might imagine himself to
    have reached the extreme limits of intelligence; someone with a little
    scientific knowledge might imagine himself to be a perfect expert. Someone
    whose genealogy has [obscure] bad origins and whose ancestors were not even
    great tyrants is more infatuated with himself than if he were the son of the
    [mighty] Pharaoh of the forces.^[This is a Quranic expression, (Quran 89:10)]
    If he has some value as a warrior he thinks he can put ʿAlī [bin Abī Ṭālib] to
    flight, capture al-Zubayr [bin al-ʿAwwām] and slay Khālid [bin al- Walīd]. If
    he is at all notorious, he holds Alexander the Great in small esteem. If he is
    capable of gaining a little money and to obtain a little more than the
    absolute necessities of life, he is as proud of it as if he had got hold of
    the sun by its horns. However, pride among such men, even if they are
    admirable fellows, is not common.

    However, if it is common among those who have a iota of knowledge, nobility,
    fortune, reputation, or courage. They are dragged along by others, and they
    trample on those who are weaker than themselves. Although they are perfectly
    aware that they themselves are lacking in all good qualities and have none
    whatsoever, they are still haughty and insolent.

266. I took the opportunity of asking one such man---gently and tactfully---
what was the cause of his sense of superiority and his disdain of others. The
only answer I could get was this: “I am a free man,” he said, “I am nobody's
slave.”

    I replied “Most people that one meets share this same quality with you.
    Like you, they are free men, except for a certain number of slaves who are
    more generous than you and who give orders to you and to many other free
    men.” I could not get anything else out of him.

267. I returned to consideration of their case, going into the matter deeply.
I thought about it for years on end, trying to find the reasons which drove
them to pride that was so unjustified. I searched the recesses of their souls
incessantly, on the basis of what their words reflected of their situation and
their intentions. I came to the conclusion that they imagined themselves to
have a superior intelligence and perception and a good sense of judgment.
[They believed that] if fate had allowed them to make use of these talents,
they would have had immense possibilities, they would have known how to direct
powerful kingdoms and their merit would have appeared superior to that of
other men. If they had had a fortune they would have been very good at
spending it. And this is the angle by which vanity has taken possession of
them and pride has penetrated their souls.

268. Here one might make curious digressions and [point out] certain
paradoxes. It is a fact that no virtue except that of intelligence and
perception allows one to believe that one is a past master in it, and the more
one is completely sure that one has attained perfection in it, the more one
lacks it.

    This is so much the case that one will see a raving lunatic or an
    inveterate sot making fun of a sane man. A mentally deficient person will
    mock men who are wise, virtuous, and knowledgeable. Little boys shout
    after grown men. Men who are stupid and insolent disdain men who are
    intelligent and reserved. Even the weakest women think that the spirit and
    opinions of great men lack vigour. In sum, the weaker the intelligence the
    more man imagines himself well endowed and in possession of excellent
    powers of perception. This is not at all the case with other qualities:
    someone who has none of them knows that he lacks them. Error only arises
    in a man who has a small portion, even if it is tiny, because he then
    imagines, if he has limited powers of perception, that he possesses this
    quality to the highest degree.

269. The cures for pride among such people are poverty and obscurity; there is
nothing more effective, for if not awed they are bad and a considerable
nuisance to other men. You find them doing nothing but discrediting people,
attacking their reputations, mocking at everybody, scorning all rights, and
permitting themselves every indiscretion. They go to the limit, to the point
of risking injury to themselves, and entering into dispute, they even come to
blows and punches for the most futile cause that presents itself.

270. It can happen that pride lies hidden in the depths of a man's heart and
does not appear until he meets with some success or acquires some fortune and
his good sense can neither control nor conceal this feeling.

271. Something that I have seen that is very curious, among certain weak
creatures, is that they are so dominated by a deep love for their grandchild
or their wife that they describe them in public as extremely intelligent. They
go as far as to say, “She is more intelligent than me and I regard her advice
as a blessing.” They praise her beauty, her charm, her vivacity---this often
happens with very feeble men---and do it so much and so well that if they
wished to find her a husband they need say nothing more in order to make
someone desire her from their description. Such behaviour is only found among
souls which are weak and lacking in all self-esteem.

272. Take care not to boast, because nobody will believe you, even if you are
telling the truth. On the contrary, they will take everything that you have
said when boasting about yourself and use it as the basis of their criticism
of you.

273. Take care not to praise someone to his face; this would be to behave like
a vile flatterer.

274. Also take care not to pretend to be poor. You will not gain anything
except to be treated as a liar or to be scorned by anyone who listens to you.
You will have no benefit from it except that you will fail to recognize the
gifts you have from the Lord, and if you complain about it to anyone they will
have no pity on you.

276. You should also take care not to display your wealth for all that you
will achieve is that those who hear you will covet what you possess.

277. Be content to offer thanks to the Almighty, to confide your needs to Him,
and to take notice of those who are inferior to Him. In this way you will keep
your dignity, and those who envy you will leave you alone.

278. A wise man is one who does not neglect the duties imposed upon him by
intelligence.

279. Anyone who tempts others with his riches has no choice but to share them
out---and there would be no end to this---or to refuse them which would make
him seem mean and would attract universal hostility. If you wish to give
something to somebody, do it of your own initiative and before he asks for it;
this is more noble, more disinterested and more worthy of praise.

280. Something peculiar about envy is when you hear a jealous person say, when
someone has done original work in some branch of science, “What a silly
person! Nobody has ever put forward that hypothesis before and nobody has ever
believed that.” But if the same person hears someone expound an idea which is
not new, he exclaims. “What a silly person! This is not a new idea!” This sort
of person is harmful because he is bent on obstructing the path of knowledge
and turning people away from it in order to increase the number of his own
sort, the ignorant.

281. The wisdom of the wise man brings him no profit in the eyes of a wicked
man; the latter thinks that he is as wicked as himself. Thus I have seen vile
creatures imagine in their vile souls that everybody was like themselves; they
would never believe that it was possible, in one way or another, not to have
their faults. There is no character more corrupt, there is none more remote
from being virtuous and good. Anyone who is in this state cannot hope to be
cured at all. Allāh help us in all matters.

282. Justice is a fortress in which all who are frightened take refuge. In
fact, if a tyrant feels oppressed, does he not call for justice and scorn and
condemn injustice? But you never see the opposite, someone condemning justice.
Therefore a man who is equitable by nature can rest at peace in this
impregnable fortress.

283. Scorn is a variety of treachery, for someone can be disloyal towards you
without scorning you, but if he scorns you he is betraying the impartiality he
should show towards you. Therefore every scornful man is disloyal, but not
every disloyal man is scornful.

284. If you scorn a thing it shows that you scorn the man who possesses it.

285. There are two circumstances in which it is good to do something which
would otherwise be bad: it is when one wishes to reproach someone or to
present excuses to someone. In these two cases, it is permissible to list past
benefits and recall gifts. In all cases except these two, it would be in the
worst possible taste.

286. We should not criticise someone who has a natural tendency towards a vice
---even if it were the worst possible fault, the greatest of vices---as long as
he does not let it appear in anything he says or does. He would almost deserve
more commendation than someone who naturally inclines towards virtue, for it
takes a strong and virtuous mind to control a corrupt natural inclination.

287. To attack a man's conjugal honour is worse than to attack his life.

288. To a well-born man, honour is dearer than gold. A well-born man should
use his gold to protect his body, his body to protect his soul, his soul to
protect his honour, and his honour to defend his religion. But he must never
sacrifice his religion in defense of anything whatsoever.

289. To attack a man's honour is less serious than to steal from his property.
The proof of this is that almost nobody, not even the most virtuous, can say
that he has never attacked anyone's honour, though it may have been only
rarely. But to have stolen someone's property, whether on a small scale or a
large scale, is definitely the deed of a vile person and far from virtue.

290. Drawing analogies between different situations is mostly deceptive and it
can be quite false. This form of argument is not acceptable in problems which
concern religion.

291. A man who blindly follows another slavishly is asking to be cheated out
of his own thoughts when he would consider it the greatest crimes to be
cheated out of his money. He is equally wrong in both cases.

292. A man who considers it hateful to be tricked out of his fortune, and
regards it as the worst of crimes, must have an ignoble character, a mean
spirit, and a soul worthy of disdain.

293. Anyone who does not know where to find virtue should rely on the
commandments of Allāh and His Prophet---Peace of Allāh be upon him. All the
virtues are contained in these commandments.

294. It is possible to bring about something dangerous by trying to guard
against it. It is possible to let out a secret by trying to hard to keep it.
Sometimes it is better to avoid a subject than to raise doubts by dwelling on
it. In each of these cases the harm comes from overdoing it and going beyond
the boundaries of the happy medium.

295. Virtue is the medium between the two extremes [the “too much” and the
“too little”]. These two extremes are to be criticised---and virtue, lying
between them, is to be praised---except when it is a question of intelligence,
and then there can be no excess.

296. It is better to sin by being too strict than by being too soft.

297. It is astonishing to see that virtue is regarded as lovely but difficult,
and vice as awful but easy to commit.

298. A person who wishes to be fair should put himself in his adversary's
position. He will then see the unfairness of his own behaviour.

299. The definition of strictness consists of being able to distinguish a
friend from an enemy. The height of stupidity and weakness is the inability to
distinguish one's enemy from one's friend.

300. Do not deliver your enemy to an oppressor, and do not oppress him
yourself. Treat him as you would treat your friend, except for trusting him.
Be careful not to mix with him or help him rise socially; that would be the
behaviour of a fool. Anyone who treats his enemy as equal to his friend in
closeness and in promoting his position only succeeds in making people avoid
his friendship and they find it just as easy to be his enemies. He will only
win the disrespect of his enemy by handing him his vulnerable places, and he
will lose his friend, since the latter will join the ranks of his adversaries.

301. The greatest of good deeds is to refrain from punishing your enemy and
from handing him over to an oppressor. As for mixing with him, that is the
mark of fools who will soon be lost.

302. The worst evil is to oppress your friend. As for keeping him away from
yourself, that would be the action of a man without spirit and destined to
misfortune.

303. Magnanimity consists not of mingling with your enemies but of showing
mercy to them while still not trusting them.

304. How many men have we not seen take pride in their possessions and so be
lost! Guard against this attitude, it is really harmful and completely
useless. How many men we have seen lost because of something they said. But we
have never heard of anyone being lost because he kept silent. Therefore you
should speak only to please your Creator; and if you fear that what you say
will be abused, then keep silent.

305. I have rarely seen a lost opportunity ever reoccur.

306. A man undergoes many trials during his life, but the worst are those
inflicted by his fellow man. The harm done by man to man is worse than the
harm done by furious beasts and poisoned vipers for you cannot protect
yourself at all against the human race.

307. Hypocrisy is the thing which is most widespread among people and it is
amazing to see that, despite this, people only like those who treat them
hypocritically.

308. If we said that characters are round like a globe because their extremes
meet, we should not be far from the truth. Indeed we see that the consequences
of the two cries for sorrow; too much love makes one commit as many successive
faults as excessive hatred does, and can cause estrangement if the loved one
lacks patience and fairness.

309. If a man is dominated by a natural passion, then, however firm and
sensible he is in other ways, he can be overcome if you attack this weak
point.

310. An over-suspicious mind learns to tell lies: since he often needs to
excuse himself by lying, he is practised in it and finds it easy.

311. The most impartial witness against a man who is given to sincerity is his
face; it clouds over as soon as he tells a lie or is about to do so.

312. The most implacable witness against a liar is his own tongue; it gets
twisted and contradicts itself.

313. It is a greater catastrophe to have an unfaithful friend than to lose
him.

314. Those who show most horror when speaking out loud of shameful acts are
those who are most apt to commit them. This can clearly be seen in the
insolence offered by guttersnipes[^mean-guttersnipe] and the insults of vile
men who have reached the nadir[^mean-nadir] of vileness in practising vile
professions. For example, those men and women who earn a living by playing the
flute, sweeping out farmyards, workings as servants in abattoirs, those who
frequent the [drinking houses] brothel authorized as meeting places of people
of the lowest class or stable boys. Nobody abuses them more than they abuse
themselves. More than anybody else they cry scandal when they
wallow[^mean-wallow] in it in the first place and have acquired the worst of
reputations by it.

[^mean-guttersnipe]: _guttersnipe_: A child brought up ‘in the gutter’; one of
the lowest class; an urchin.

[^mean-nadir]: _nadir_: The lowest point (of anything); the place or time of greatest
depression or degradation.

[^mean-wallow]: _wallow_: To roll the body about indolently or clumsily in or
as if in water, snow, or mud.

315. Meetings make grudges melt away.^[This is a part of a _ḥadīth_.] One
would think that when glances meet, hearts grow peaceful. Do not torture
yourself if your friend meets your enemy, for the meeting will lessen the
latter's hatred towards you.

316. The worst misfortunes that can come upon men are fear, anxiety, sickness,
and poverty. But the thing that makes the soul suffer most cruelty is the
anxiety of losing what one loves and to see something happen that one hates.
After this comes sickness, then fear, then poverty. The proof of this is that
people would willingly accept poverty to avoid the pains of illness. For a man
quests ardently after health and does not count what he spends to recover it
when he fears death. When his end is certain he would like to be able to give
his entire fortune to be saved and cured. Fear is bearable when it drives off
anxiety, for a man seeks with all his soul to drive away anxiety. The worst of
all illnesses is pain that persists in one organ, always the same.

317. But to be a well-born spirit, humiliation is less bearable than all the
misfortunes we have described. On the other hand, it is the one that knavish[^mean-knavish]
spirits fear the least.

[^mean-knavish]: _knavish_: Roguish, rascally, mischievous, impertinent.
# Characteristics of the Soul

318. A wise man should not judge by appearances when a
sniveller[^mean-sniveller] cries for mercy, pretends that he is oppressed,
complains, twists and turns, and laments. With a man who behaves like this I
have become certain that he was the oppressor who went over the limit and
committed excessive abuses. And likewise I have seen a man bearing an
injustice speak calmly without complaining and only displaying a little
anxiety. At first glance, without further examination, you would have taken
him for the oppressor. In cases such as this it is important to establish the
facts, fight resolutely against our inclination to take sides, not incline
towards or against such attitudes as we have described, and seek to be
impartial to all, as we are obliged to by justice.

[^mean-sniveller]: _sniveller_: One who snivels or whines.

319. A curious thing about human nature is that carelessness is bad when it is
good to know how to make use of it sometimes. This can only be explained by
the fact that a man who is naturally inclined to carelessness, makes use of it
when he should be vigilant. It is absentmindedness with no sense of reality.
His carelessness belongs under the heading of ignorance and that is why it is
bad. On the other hand, a spirit which is vigilant by nature only makes use of
carelessness for a good purpose when he should not study or research deeply
into the subject. To pretend to ignore something in this case means to
understand reality, to refuse to act precipitously, to use moderation and to
prevent the worst happening. Thus it is praiseworthy to know how to pretend
not to be listening, and bad to be naturally inattentive.

320. The same could be said about admitting one is afraid or concealing the
fact. To make it obvious that one is troubled as soon as one begins to have
difficulties is bad, because it means that you cannot control yourself and
your display of emotion serves no useful purpose. Indeed, divine law counsels
against it; it stops you doing what has to be done and to make the necessary
arrangements in view of the events which one foresees and which may be more
terrible than the present situation which has given rise to this fear.

321. Now, given that it is wrong to let your fear be seen, the opposite is
good, that is, to display patience, because that means you are in control of
yourself, you have turned away from useless actions and towards actions which
are profitable and useful both immediately and in the future.

322. As for hiding your patience, that is wrong too, since it would look as if
you were unfeeling, hardhearted and lacking in mercy. These faults are found
only among wicked people, vicious natures, and cruel and vile souls.

323. All this being very ugly, the opposite, which consists of concealing the
fact that you are troubled, is praiseworthy because it is a mark of pity,
gentleness, charity, and compassion.

324. Thus one can say that the happy medium, for a man, is to have a sensitive
soul but an impassive body, that is to say that neither on his face or in his
comportment[^mean-comportment] should there be any sign that he is troubled.

    If a man whose own judgement is poor only knew what harm his false
    calculations had brought upon him so far, he would find success in the
    future if he stopped relying on his own judgement, Allāh guide us.

[^mean-comportment]: _comportment_: Personal bearing, carriage, demeanour, deportment; behaviour, outward conduct, course of action.
# Man's Desire to Know

325. There are longings from which hardly anyone is exempt, except a man whose
thoughts are completely vile or one who has trained himself by a perfect
system of discipline and has completely tamed the power of his angry soul. In
order to cure the avid desire that the soul feels to seize information that
one wants to conceal from it or to see an object that one wants to hide from
him, you should think of all the things of the same kind which escape him in
places where he has not been, let alone the most distant areas of the earth.
If the person worries about them he is completely mad and totally lacking in
reason. [On the other hand] if he is not worried about these other things, is
the thing hidden from him not the same as these things that do not worry him,
absolutely identical in fact? He should multiply the arguments directed
against his passion, and he should speak to his soul with the voice of reason,
“O my soul, if you did not know that there was something there being hidden
from you, do you think that you would worry about getting to know it?” There
is no doubt that the answer would be “No.” Then he should say to his soul,
“Act as if you did not know that there was something there being hidden from
you. Then you can relax and you will be able to drive away your anxiety and
calm your painful agitation and your hateful greed.” These are numerous
victories, considerable gains, and noble ambitions to which a wise man aspires
and which only someone totally lacking disdains.

326. As for the man who has the ambition and the obsession to spread his fame
to every country and to be remembered throughout the centuries, let him
reflect and say to his soul: “O my soul, if you were gloriously famous in all
the countries of the world, for all eternity and to the end of time, but if I
was not told about it and if I knew nothing about it, do you think I
would be happy or satisfied about it, yes or no?” There is no doubt that the
answer would be “No,” for any other answer would be impossible. Having
convinced himself of this truth, the man must understand that when he is dead
he will have no possibility of knowing whether he is famous or not. Moreover
he would not know while he was still alive if nobody told him.

327. He should also consider two important points. First, that there have been
in earlier times a great number of virtuous Prophets and Messengers of Allāh---
Allāh grant them His blessing---of whom nobody on the surface of the earth
remembers the name, nor any trace, nor any memory, nor their history, nor the
slightest thing about them.

328. Secondly, there have been, among the good and virtuous men who were the
companions of the Prophets in ancient times, ascetics, philosophers, scholars,
excellent men, kings of nations which have disappeared, founders of cities
which are now deserted, and courtesans of princes whose history has also not
come down to us. Nobody knows anything about them nowadays and nobody has the
slightest knowledge that they existed. Has that fact harmed any of them that
were virtuous? Has it diminished their merit, destroyed their good deeds, has
it lowered them in the eyes of their Almighty Creator? Let me tell anyone who
did not already know it, that there does not exist anywhere in the world the
smallest scrap of information about any of the earthly sovereigns or the
ancient generations who preceded men's historical knowledge, which begins with
the kings of Isrāʾīl. And everything that we know of the history of the
sovereigns of Greece and of Persia does not go back further than two thousand
years. Where is the remembrance of the men who peopled the earth before them?
Is it not, in fact, totally wiped out, disappeared, vanished, forgotten?

    This is why the Almighty has spoken of “Messengers of whom We have not
    told you the history at all” [Quran 4:164] and Allāh also said, “Many
    centuries in between,” [Quran 25:38] and Allāh also said, “Those who came
    after and who are known only to Allāh” [Quran 14:9]. Even if the memory of
    a man persists for a short period of time, would that in itself make him
    any different from those who lived in olden times in nations that have
    disappeared and of which the memory also persisted a short while before
    being completely lost?

329. We should also think of those who were famous for their good deeds or
their bad deeds; did their fame raise them one single degree in the sight of
Allāh? Did it win them a reward that they had not already won by their actions
during their life?

330. Since this is so, the desire to be famous is nothing but the desire for
something absolutely senseless and useless. On the contrary, a wise man should
aspire only to multiply his virtues and good deeds, which make the one who
applies himself to them merit a good reputation, praise, commendation, and a
praiseworthy reputation which will bring him nearer to his Creator and will be
useful in remembering him to the Almighty. He will keep himself in this
beneficial state and will never be lost for all eternity; assistance is from
Allāh.

331. Gratitude towards a benefactor is a necessary obligation. To fulfill it,
you should at least render to him the good that he had done to you, and more.
Afterwards you should show interest in his affairs, protect him as much as
possible, keep faithfully to promises you have made him, in his life or after
his death, and to his relations, both distant and close. Thus you should
continue to show affection to him, to give him advice. You should make his
good qualities known truthfully and you should conceal his faults. [These
obligations lie upon you] for the rest of your life and should be handed down
to your descendents and to those you love.

332. However, it is no part of gratitude to assist someone in committing sin
and not to advise him in the cases where he is doing himself harm in this
world and the next. On the contrary, anyone who helps his benefactor to do
evil is deceiving him, denying his benefactions, acting unjustly in his
respect, and failing to recognize his goodness. Moreover, the goodness and
benefactions of Allāh towards each one of His creatures are much more
considerable, more longstanding, and more salutary than those of any other
benefactor. Indeed, it is the Almighty who has opened our eyes to see, who has
pierced our ears to hear, it is He who has granted us the other excellent
senses and has endowed us with speech and discernment, two benefits by grace
of which we have been made able to hear His words. He has subjected to our
service everything which exists in the skies and upon the earth---stars and
elements---and has placed none of His creatures above us, except only His holy
angels, the inhabitants of the heavens. What are the gifts of men compared
with these! Anyone who imagines that he is thanking a benefactor by helping
him to do evil, or by taking his side when he should not, would be denying the
gifts of the greatest of his benefactors, whose gifts he would be failing to
recognize. He would not be rendering thanks to Him to whom all thanks truly
belong, he would not be praising Him who is the essence of praiseworthiness,
that is to say, Allāh Almighty.

    Anyone who steps between his benefactor and evil, leading him back to the
    bitter truth, would be showing true gratitude and would be fulfilling
    perfectly his obligation towards him. Praises be to Allāh at first and at
    last and in all circumstances!

# Attending Study-Sessions

333. If you attend a study-session, behave only like someone who wishes to
increase his knowledge and to win greater recompense from Allāh. Do not behave
like someone who is content with what he has, who is looking for some fault to
criticise or a curious detail to hawk around. This would be the behaviour of
vile men who never succeed in their studies.

    If you come to it with good intentions, you will always obtain the best
    results. Otherwise, to stay at home would be less tiring for your body,
    more worthy of your moral conduct, and more salutary[^mean-salutary] for
    your religious life.

    [^mean-salutary]: _salutary_: Conducive to well-being; calculated to bring
    about a more satisfactory condition, or to remedy some evil; beneficial,
    ‘wholesome.’

334. If you do attend under the conditions that we have indicated, take care
to adopt one of these three attitudes and there cannot be a fourth: [First,]
you may keep quiet in the silence of ignorance. Thus you will obtain the
reward of your intention in attending the study-session, praise for your
reserve, dignity in your behaviour and the friendship of those you mix with.

335. [Secondly,] if you do not behave like this, ask the questions which
someone who wished to learn would ask. Then you will obtain, in addition to
the four advantages just mentioned, a fifth, which is to increase your
knowledge. What characterises the questions asked by someone who wishes to
learn is that he only asks about the points he does not know, not those he
does know. To ask about what one already knows is a proof of ineptitude and a
weak spirit, it is only palaver[^mean-palaver] and a useless waste of time for
oneself and for others. By doing this you will only provoke dislike and it
will only be pure verbiage. So do not play games, it is a bad fault.

    If the person you are asking replies satisfactorily, stop questioning. If
    his reply is not satisfactory, or if you do not understand it, say to him,
    “I do not understand,” and ask him to elaborate. If he does not explain
    himself more clearly, if he keeps silent or if he repeats what he said
    before without adding anything, keep silent, otherwise you will only bring
    upon yourself trouble and dislike, without obtaining the desired
    enlightenment.

    [^mean-palaver]: _palaver_: Applied contemptuously to (what is considered)
    unnecessary, profuse, or idle talk; ‘jaw.’

336. [Thirdly,] you can riposte[^mean-riposte] as a scholar would, that is to
say that you can reply to the arguments advanced in a way that refutes them
clearly. If you are not capable of replying in this way, if you are able only
to repeat yourself or to reply using arguments which your adversary will not
find convincing, do not insist for you will not gain by your repetitions any
extra result or any information. You will only succeed in annoying yourself
and starting a hostility between the two of you which could have serious
consequences.

[^mean-riposte]: _riposte_: To reply or retaliate; to answer (one).

337. Guard against the questions that a prejudiced man would ask or the
ripostes of a show-off who is bent on being right without knowing anything
about the matter. These two attitudes are bad: they witness to absence of
piety, a great tendency to verbiage, a weakness of spirit and considerable
vanity. Let us commend the matter to Allāh who is our best support.

338. If certain statements are put to you verbally, or if you come across a
written text, guard against reacting violently, which will bring about
excesses in language, before you have assured yourself by irrefutable proof
that the ideas expressed are erroneous.

    Neither should you accept them with the enthusiasm of someone who is
    credulous[^mean-credulous] and convinced until you have assured yourself
    of their veracity by an irrefutable proof. In the two cases, you would be
    shutting your eyes and turning away from knowing the truth. On the
    contrary, consider what is being put to you as one who is neither against
    it nor for it or one who wants to understand would, to the best of his
    ability, what he has heard and read in order to increase his knowledge, to
    adopt the new ideas if they are good or reject them if they are erroneous.
    It is certain that if you behave like this you will be generally rewarded,
    greatly praised, and your merit will be recognized.

    [^mean-credulous]: _credulous_: Over-ready to believe; apt to believe on weak or insufficient grounds.

339. A man who is content with the small fortune that he has and does not envy
your opulence[^mean-opulence] is as rich as you, even if you are a Croesus. If
this man resists the bait of gain to which you have succumbed, he will be much
richer than you.

[^mean-opulence]: _opulence_: Wealth, riches, affluence.

340. Anyone who rises above the things of this world to which you kneel is
mightier than you.

341. It is a pious duty for Muslims to teach the good and to practise it.
Anyone who does both these things at once is doing two virtuous deeds to
perfection. But a person who contents himself with teaching the good without
practicing it is acting well by teaching and acting badly by failing to put
his teaching into practise, so mingling a good with a bad deed. This case is
preferable to that of the person who would not teach the good any more than he
would practise it. Such a man, although not virtuous, is more worthy of
imitation, he is less blameworthy than someone who forbids the teaching of
good and opposing anyone who practises it.

342. If it was only a man completely without sin who had the right to forbid
evil, if it was only the man of perfect virtue who could teach the good,
nobody yet would have forbidden evil or ordained the good since [the death of]
the Prophet (Peace be upon him). This should be enough to make clear to you
the corruption, wickedness, and opprobrium[^mean-opprobrium] of anyone who
might think this.

[^mean-opprobrium]: _opprobrium_: The disgrace or evil reputation attached to
conduct considered shameful; the imputation or expression of this disgrace;
infamy, reproach.

343. Abū Muḥammad (May Allāh be pleased with him) said, “Here someone
contradicted, protesting, ‘When al-Ḥasan [al-Baṣrī] (May Allāh be pleased with
him) forbade something [bad], he never did it himself, and when he ordained
something [good], he himself put his orders firmly into practice. Wisdom
requires that we do the same, for it has been said that: nothing is more
odious than to preach something and not practise it, or to preach against an
action and then to do it.’”

344. Abū Muḥammad replied, “The person who said that was lying. There is
something more ugly, that is, not to preach good and not to preach against
evil and also to allow oneself to act badly and not to do good.”

<!-- TODO the following has a poem -->

345. Abū Muḥammad added: “Abū al-Aswad al-Duʿalī said:[^edit-poem]

    | Do not forbid a vice that you are given to yourself
    |        for great shame will fall on you.
    | Start with yourself and forbid yourself your own misdeeds.
    |        If you stop devoting yourself to them you will become wise.
    | Then your sermons will be accepted, people will take example
    |        from your knowledge and your teaching will be profitable.’”

[^edit-poem]: Typesetter: I've made slight edits here to cater for margin constraints while maintaining meaning.

346. Abū Muḥammad continued: Abū al-Aswad wished to condemn only someone who
has done a deed after forbidding it to others: such a deed would be doubly bad
for having been committed by the very person who forbade it. The poet was
quite right for this is what the Almighty said, “Will you command people to
do good and forget to do it yourself?” [Quran 2:44]. It cannot be believed
that Abū al-Aswad wanted to express any other idea. As for thinking that he
did not want to be condemned for a bad deed, Allāh protect him from that! That
would have been to act like a wicked man.

347. Here is a true story about al-Ḥasan: When he heard someone say that only
a person who did no evil had the right to forbid evil, he replied, “Shayṭān
would like us to believe that, and then nobody could forbid evil or ordain
good.” Abū Muḥammad continued: “Al-Ḥasan was right, and that is what we said
before.”

348. May Allāh grant that we may count among the number of those whom He permits
to do good and to practice it, and among the number of those who see the
straight road, for no one is without faults; someone who perceives his own
weaknesses will forget those of others. May Allāh permit us to die in the Sunnah
[law] of Muḥammad. Āmīn, O Lord of the Worlds!

[This book is finished, by the Grace of Allāh, His help, and His good will.
May Allāh bless our master Muḥammad, his family, and his companions, grant
them life eternal, and may Allāh be pleased with Aḥmad [Muḥammad], Messenger
of Allāh!]